---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Evidence of Muscular Dysfunction and Increased Injury
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### SHOULDER DYSFUNCTION

Shoulder pain is a common occurrence, especially as the body ages. Simple, routine movements, such as taking out the trash, getting dressed, or reaching for something overhead, can often cause discomfort when the shoulder joints are in a deconditioned state. Shoulder pain and injuries are also quite common in sports and weight training, especially during overhead lifting. Shoulder problems may be due to the instability of the shoulder joint or impingement of the soft tissue or bony structures of the shoulder, known as **shoulder impingement syndrome** (Mitchell et al., 2005).

Because so many functional movements involve the shoulders, fitness professionals must have a working knowledge of their muscles and structures. A regular routine of upper-body flexibility and properly implemented strength training can help reduce the risk of shoulder injuries. In addition, fitness professionals should ensure clients perform high-intensity exercises correctly and only engage in training programs that are suitable for their individual abilities, goals, and objectives; for example, aggressive swinging pull-ups and hammer swing exercises can be dangerous for individuals without advanced levels of shoulder fitness already in place (Summitt et al., 2016).

### HEAD AND NECK DYSFUNCTION

Headaches and neck pain are common ailments, and poor posture of the head and neck are often the cause. Much of the time, poor head and neck posture is due to extended periods looking at computer screens or mobile phones. For example,* text neck *is a growing phenomenon that researchers are investigating to identify whether habitual use of cell phones influences neck pain (Gustafsson et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2016). Placing the head in a constant state of flexion (looking downward) affects many of the muscles of the neck area and may cause neck soreness.

Forward head posture is another common cause of head and neck pain. Jutting the head forward increases the workload for many of the muscles attached to the cervical spine (upper spine area), which has the job of stabilizing the head. Over time, forward head posture can lead to dysfunction of the neck area as the body tries to adapt and find efficient ways to raise the head for straight-ahead vision. Forward head posture can be seen in office workers and other individuals who routinely work in front of a computer and naturally tend to migrate the head toward the screen when trying to focus (Nejati et al., 2015; Szeto et al., 2002).

Exercise has been shown to be beneficial for individuals exhibiting forward head posture, especially for the reduction of lingering neck discomfort (Sheikhhoseini et al., 2018). Many people who seek the services of a fitness professional are habitual mobile phone users or office workers who spend most of their day working on a computer. Consequently, fitness professionals should monitor the position of their clients’ head and neck during exercise to minimize the risk of injury and help train proper posture and movement patterns.

## Key Terms

**Shoulder impingement syndrome**
Shoulder pain caused by rotator cuff tissues rubbing against the acromion bone of the shoulder.