---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### CHAPTER REVIEW

Sedentary lifestyles and convenience-focused diets continue to fuel elevated rates of obesity and related chronic health conditions, keeping the need for fitness professionals at an all-time high. The global impact of chronic disease and muscular and skeletal dysfunction is staggering, from both an economic and a human standpoint. Chronic diseases including heart disease, cancer, and diabetes are the leading causes of death and disability in many regions across the globe. Physical inactivity and poor diet are the primary contributors to rapidly rising increases in chronic disease rates worldwide.

Alongside other health and wellness practitioners, Certified Personal Trainers represent a powerful force for change, helping clients improve their fitness for long-lasting health and happiness. Certified Personal Trainers are a vital part of the healthcare continuum; they can become instrumental as a form of preventive care and can help clients improve their health following an illness or injury, once the client has received medical clearance. Simple strategies such as eating healthier and engaging in regular physical activity can have dramatic results and a lasting impact on preventing and treating the consequences of chronic disease and musculoskeletal dysfunction.

### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 1 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 1 Audio Review

**00:0012:23**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- The focus on scientific principles makes NASM’s systems and methodologies safe and effective for any client working toward any fitness goal.

	- NASM recommends that all fitness professionals maintain a focus on an evidence-based practice to attain the highest levels of success.

	- Evidence-based practice is the conscientious use of current best evidence in making decisions about patient or client care.

	- NASM’s proprietary approach to exercise training, the OPT model, was developed with evidence-based practice as a core guiding philosophy.

	- Acute disease is any suddenly occurring medical condition that can be treated and healed in a short period of time.

	- A chronic disease is a medical condition that persists without quickly going away or being cured altogether.

	- The terms *overweight *and *obesity* refer to a body weight that is greater than what is considered normal or healthy for a certain height, specifically due to excess body fat.

	- Being overweight or obese greatly increase the chances of developing a chronic disease.

	- *Cardiovascular disease* is a broad term describing numerous problems of the heart and blood vessels, including stroke, heart attacks, heart failure, heart valve problems, and arrhythmias.

	- Hypertension is one of the primary risk factors for heart disease and stroke, which are the global leading causes of death.

	- Cholesterol is a waxy substance found in the blood that is made up of a combination of protein and fatty acids.

	- Diabetes is a disease in which blood glucose levels are too high. Glucose comes from the foods we eat.

	- Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas that helps glucose get into cells to provide the energy for work.

	- Cancer is an abnormal growth of cells that can result from a wide range of genetic and environmental factors.