---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Physical Inactivity and Its Relationship to Chronic Disease
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
## Physical Inactivity and Its Relationship  to Chronic Disease

The global impact of chronic disease is staggering, from both an economic and a human standpoint. Chronic diseases including heart disease, cancer, and diabetes are the leading causes of death and disability in the United States as well as in many locations across the globe. Besides loss of life and quality of life through disability associated with chronic disease, the annual healthcare costs in the United States alone are more than $3 trillion and growing. Furthermore, 90% of the nation’s healthcare expenditures are applied toward treating individuals with chronic and mental health conditions (Misselbrook, 2014).

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

A sedentary lifestyle is one of the biggest causes of developing a chronic health condition, but roughly 3 in 4 adults and more than 80% of adolescents do not meet recommended physical activity guidelines. Regardless of whether someone has a chronic disease, getting active can go a long way toward improving health and quality of life (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2018). The Healthy People 2020 initiative from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2014) and similar programs around the globe have been diligently working to change that statistic by partnering with legislators and government institutions to provide the public with more access to activity-friendly environments, such as parks, bike lanes, and walking trails so people can get more active.

Sadly, in most cases, the obvious signs of chronic disease go unnoticed until it is often too late. Although secondary prevention (i.e., treating chronic health conditions after they become apparent) is a viable and highly recommended approach, primary prevention (i.e., treating before the conditions develop) is still the preferred goal. For example, regular physical activity and exercise are important in both primary and secondary prevention of chronic disease. Regular physical activity, as measured by aerobic conditioning and aerobic fitness, is perhaps the strongest overall predictor of death, disability, and disease (Blair, 2009).

From another perspective, individuals who maintain their cardiovascular fitness levels across their life span are two to four times less likely to develop heart disease, or die prematurely from it (Reimers et al., 2012). Encouragement of regular participation in physical activity and exercise is an essential part of preventing and managing chronic disease worldwide. If one were to consider the overall negative impact of physical inactivity on global health and the economy, such as lost wages and increased cost of health care, one of the most readily available and cost-effective interventions would be to get people moving on a regular basis. In fact, in the United States, around $117 billion in yearly healthcare costs can be attributed to people not getting enough physical activity in their daily lives, and this amount is likely to keep rising (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019). But the United States is not alone; physical inactivity is a global problem that must not be ignored (**Figure 1-6**) (Hallal et al., 2012).

Chronic diseases are among the most prevalent and costly health conditions in the United States (Raghupathi & Raghupathi, 2018) and globally as well. In a study conducted by Harvard University in partnership with the World Economic Forum, it was estimated that chronic disease will be responsible for a global economic loss of roughly $47 trillion by the year 2030 (Bloom et al., 2011). The global impact is staggering, and individuals at all levels of society are impacted by the growing prevalence of chronic diseases and associated **risk factors**.

## Key Terms

**Risk factor**
Any attribute, characteristic, or exposure of an individual that increases the likelihood of developing a disease or injury.

## Images

**Figure 1-6: Prevalence of physical inactivity worldwide**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH01_FIGF06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533