---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Scope of Practice and Code of Conduct
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
# Scope of Practice   and Code of Conduct

Simply put, scope of practice represents all the things a given professional can do within the legal boundaries of their job title. Certain jobs have strict regulation by law, such as medical doctors or lawyers, while others are more vaguely left up to individual interpretation. Furthermore, scope of practice for a given profession frequently varies from country to country or region to region. What might be allowed openly in one area could be completely prohibited by simply stepping over a border

Sometimes, professions that do not have their own specific governmental regulation can have their scope of practice defined through their association to other adjacent fields. Fitness professionals fall in this category. While there is no specific legal registration and regulation surrounding working as a Certified Personal Trainer in the United States and many developed countries around the world, other allied health professions have stringent rules, which prohibit Certified Personal Trainers from performing certain health-related activities. For example, in many regions, nutritional therapy can legally only be provided by a registered dietitian nutritionist or licensed healthcare providers; while in others, no licensure is required, and anyone can offer professional nutritional advice. This makes it highly important for all fitness professionals to not only understand their own scope of practice but also fully understand the scopes for adjacent allied health professionals and stay current on all local laws and regulations that pertain to providing health and wellness services to the public.

## Certified Personal Trainer’s  Scope of Practice

Certified Personal Trainers are fitness professionals who perform individualized assessments and design safe, effective, scientifically based, and individualized exercise and conditioning programs for clients who present with no medical or special needs, or who have been medically cleared for exercise. They provide guidance to help clients achieve their personal health, fitness, and performance goals via the implementation of exercise programs, general nutritional information, and suggestions for lifestyle modification. They hold a current emergency cardiac care (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) certification and respond appropriately during emergency situations. Certified Personal Trainers do not diagnose or treat areas of pain or disease, and they refer clients to other healthcare professionals when appropriate. NASM Certified Personal Trainers abide by NASM’s Code of Professional Conduct at all times.