---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Continuing Education
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
## Opportunities

The two most popular methods of earning CEUs are by attending live events, such as workshops or conferences, or by completing online education courses. Online CEUs can be earned by participating in live webinars or completing an online self-study course on a specific topic. Digital learning opportunities allow fitness professionals to learn at their own pace and often allow for a greater in-depth analysis of the learning materials. However, in-person workshops and conferences allow for invaluable networking opportunities and the ability to learn directly from professionals who are leading the industry. Different individuals have different learning preferences, so it is up to each fitness professional to identify the sources of continuing education that work best for their specific needs.

### TRADE SHOWS

Conferences, conventions, and trade shows are traditionally multiday events that feature a variety of workshop topics and speakers. Quite often, attending just one annual conference or trade show can provide an entire renewal cycle of CEUs (1.9), making conferences and trade shows cost-effective means of recertifying. Typically, a sign-up sheet will be provided at the beginning of the event, and as fitness professionals attend educational sessions and lectures, they account for their attendance on it, often requiring a signature of the presenter as proof. As technology advances, this method is beginning to be replaced with mobile, digital solutions that make accounting for trade show CEUs much easier. When the event is over, the completed attendance sheet—or copy of the digital attendance record—can be uploaded to the recertification portal as proof of earning the associated CEUs.

### WORKSHOPS

Workshops provide the opportunity to earn CEUs by getting hands-on with a specific subject, exercise programming technique, or new piece of equipment. A variety of health clubs, certifying organizations including NASM, and equipment companies frequently offer workshops on a number of different topics. Once a fitness professional has identified a specific education need, a simple internet search for “fitness workshops near me” can help identify potential opportunities. As with trade shows, third-party workshops require documented proof of attendance.

### ONLINE CEUS AND SPECIALIZATIONS

There are a variety of options for earning CEUs online, including participating in webinars, completing specially designed CEU courses, or earning an advanced specialization. Online continuing education courses vary in terms of depth, rigor, and price. Some courses may be short and inexpensive and offer a small amount of CEUs (0.1–0.3). Other courses, including advanced specializations, can be worth up to 1.9 CEUs and teach topics in great detail. Topics of online continuing education courses can include nutrition, corrective exercise, performance enhancement, behavior change, or special populations.

### COLLEGE COURSES AND INDUSTRY CONTRIBUTIONS

Many higher learning institutions, such as community colleges, allow area residents to take single classes that can then be evaluated by the certifying agency and approved for CEUs. Typically, any higher education course in exercise science, kinesiology, anatomy, physical education, exercise physiology, or nutritional science can be submitted for CEUs. Values will depend on how many contact hours of instruction the course contained.