---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Career Development
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### THE INTERVIEW

The interview is a formal process that enables job candidates to display their personality, convey their work ethic, and discuss aspects of their job history beyond what is on their resume. It is also an opportunity for job candidates to learn more about the business, its practices and processes, and its culture.

At an interview, it will be important to focus on the conversation and answer all questions with as much clarity and honesty as possible. There is nothing wrong with saying, “I don’t know,” when it comes to a technical question. It is much better to be honest and truthful than to evade the issue and make up things. The primary purpose of the interview is to identify the candidate’s ability to communicate effectively and function as a member of the team. During the interview, a candidate should discuss how their previous work experience can benefit the employer, as well as share any relevant information that demonstrates the ability to successfully function as a member of a team. The following guidelines should be used to maximize success during an interview.

	- Pre-interview

           Read the job description several times prior to the interview to become familiar with the position and its responsibilities.

           Research the company in advance by visiting its website.

           Practice answering potential interview questions prior to the actual interview.

           Prepare at least three questions in advance to ask the interviewer.

	- Interview

           Wear professional business attire.

           Bring a padfolio, a professional looking pen, and extra copies of a resume.

           Arrive 15 minutes early.

           Be well groomed and avoid excessive makeup, flashy jewelry, and extreme hairstyles.

           When introduced, shake the interviewer’s hand and look them in the eye (unless the culture in that country does not favor this behavior).

           Ask thoughtful, open-ended questions about potential job responsibilities and the culture of the business.

           Answer interview questions clearly and concisely, using good examples.

           Practice good posture; sit up straight, and don’t slouch.

### HOW TO FOLLOW UP

It is an excellent idea to follow up after the interview with a thank you email or even a handwritten note. Writing an email or handwritten note to thank an interviewing manager for their time shows that a candidate is serious about the opportunity and interested in employment with the company. In the thank-you message, the candidate should make sure to reference specific aspects that may have been discussed during the interview, such as the potential for career advancement or options provided by the employer for continuing education. A well-written thank-you note can often make the difference and help an individual earn the job opportunity, especially when several people are interviewing for the same position.