---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Sales
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### BUILDING RAPPORT

Rapport represents the building of a relationship based on open communication and trust. Building rapport with clients requires the ability to communicate with honesty and make friendly, personal connections. Every interaction with a member or client is a chance to establish rapport and develop a relationship with a potential client. This makes it important for fitness professionals to always smile; be outgoing and friendly; ask for people’s names and use them in conversation; and uncover each prospect’s unique likes, wants, and needs. Then personal stories and life experiences can be related to those of the client in order to build a connection that leads to trust and professional respect.

Many successful Certified Personal Trainers focus new conversations on the prospect’s family, hobbies, and their desire to change their life for the better before ever discussing how an exercise program can help meet those needs. If the fitness professional is sincere in these interactions by working to build the relationship first, the sales process can become natural and automatic. Potential clients want to understand how their needs, wants, and desires are going to be satisfied. When a Certified Personal Trainer can demonstrate their value and uncompromising customer service in advance, the only decision the prospect has left is when to schedule the first appointment. Successful fitness professionals do not need to “sell” a client on anything; instead, they need to take the time to understand how each potential client wants to make lifestyle changes through exercise and demonstrate that they have what it takes to provide support and motivation for the long-term.

### FORECASTING

**Forecasting **is financial goal setting and helps determine how many prospects a fitness professional needs to interact with on a daily basis to keep a consistent client pipeline flowing. It is important for a fitness professional to set financial goals to measure progress and success. Setting a salary goal can help a fitness professional identify how many client sessions they will need to deliver to achieve that goal. This is especially important when considering a life as an independent fitness professional. If a Certified Personal Trainer is unable to accurately set and then meet monthly revenue goals while working for an employer, then it is not likely that they will be successful running a facility that requires maintaining a far more complicated budget, including rent, professional liability insurance, repairs to the facility, and any overhead costs such as compensation for employees.

### ASKING FOR THE SALE

Buying decisions are primarily emotionally driven, and the decision to invest in sessions with a Certified Personal Trainer might be extremely emotional (Ahmad et al., 2019; Kemp et al., 2018). Potential clients may be dealing with a vast array of feelings such as fear, anxiety, or inadequacy, so part of the fitness sales process is about taking the time to uncover those feelings. For example, a doctor may have advised a client to lose weight and lower blood pressure to avoid the risk for a heart attack or stroke. That is a heavy emotional load to consider, but one a Certified Personal Trainer may be able to help with. It is only after presenting the solutions to uncovered problems that a fitness professional should ask the client for a sale.

After demonstrating one’s ability to help solve a client’s fitness problems, the first step in asking for the sale involves presenting various purchasing options. Each client will place a different level of value on fitness services and will also have unique time and budgetary constraints. For that reason, it serves a fitness professional well to provide a “good, better, and best” package scheme, with price points that can appeal to a broad range of individuals. In this way, there is a solution available for everyone, from busy executives to stay-at-home parents to retirees on a fixed budget.

## Key Terms

**Forecasting**
A business management technique that helps predict how much work is needed to meet a revenue goal.