---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Sales
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
# Sales and Marketing

Clients seek the services of a fitness professional because they have a problem that needs solving. Their problems may include difficulty losing weight, lowering their blood pressure or cholesterol, or improving their strength and stamina necessary to make the varsity basketball team. Fitness professionals offer clients solutions by using exercise as their tool of choice. It is through this collaborative effort that clients aim to be become better versions of themselves.

These services cannot occur without the sales process. Building a successful personal training career requires the ability to close a sale, which can be one of the most challenging aspects of the profession. It is one of the most important skill sets that fitness professionals need to learn and practice. In particular, Certified Personal Trainers must become comfortable with the **sales process** such as presenting prices for personal training session packages and asking potential clients for the sale. After all, without the sales process, fitness professionals are not able to help their clients reach their health, wellness, or fitness-related goals. These two functions are linked and dependent on each other.

## Sales

The term *salesperson* sometimes generates a negative image, but the reality is that ethical sales techniques are rooted in helping others. When people ask about personal training services, they are really looking for advice and guidance from an expert who can help them achieve specific results through exercise. Selling personal training services is about asking a client to make a commitment to an exercise program to improve their own health, wellness, and fitness. In that light, selling becomes the process of educating potential clients about how an exercise program, catered to their individual needs, will help them achieve their goals. Fitness consumers have an interest in getting results from their workout programs, and fitness professionals who feel confident presenting their services as a solution will be most successful in the sales process.

### INTRODUCTION TO THE SALES PROCESS

For Certified Personal Trainers to have a successful career, they must be comfortable asking potential clients to purchase training sessions, which requires the ability to become comfortable with the sales process. There are specific stages of the sales process:

	- Identifying a customer’s needs

	- Communicating solutions for their needs

	- Making the sale by asking for a financial commitment to solving their needs (Gitomer, 2015)

The process of designing an exercise program is based on assessing a fitness need that the program can solve. The ethical sales process is no different; it is about assessing the client’s needs and delivering solutions. Many fitness professionals enter the profession because they sincerely want to help people, and being a true sales professional empowers that desire. A sales professional is one who educates consumers on how they will benefit from a product or service offered.

When the sales process is performed correctly, there is no pressure placed on the customer to force a decision. A sales professional guides the conversation by asking the customer several **open-ended questions**. These questions help a sales professional learn about a customer’s wants, needs, fears, and desires. Using this information, a salesperson can then accurately communicate potential solutions to the customer. Sales professionals understand that the success of their career is based on the ability to help customers find the solutions they want and need and will be ethical and honest in all communications.

## Key Terms

**Sales process**
A system for learning about the needs of a potential client to be able to identify and present a number of solutions for those needs.

**Open-ended questions**
Nondirective questions that can’t be answered with a simple yes or no answer; they require critical thinking to formulate a response.