---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Fitness Industry Employment Landscape
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
# Fitness Industry Employment Landscape

NDAB Creativity/Shutterstock.com

The fitness industry is experiencing enormous growth all around the world. In the United States, for example, the demand for “fitness trainers and instructors” (the broad job category for all fitness professionals) could grow to 402,000 jobs by the year 2028, and that is just within the domestic American health club market (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). Because this growth is seen in other parts of the world as well, this strong outlook for fitness industry employment continues to grow. Fitness professionals have the option to work for a variety of employers or to work for themselves, effectively running their own business. Subsequently, successful fitness professionals should always adopt a lifetime-learner mentality, always seeking to improve their knowledge and skills.

## Importance of Education and Certification

The profession of personal training can trace its origins to the 1970s when bodybuilders and athletes were hired to help clients develop a muscular appearance. Soon after, commercial health clubs realized that they could create an entirely new revenue stream by offering personal training services to members. As the personal training profession grew, earning a personal training credential became increasingly important. The purpose of a personal training credential is to ensure that individual job candidates can demonstrate the ability to perform the tasks required for a specific job category.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH02_UNNUN01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533