---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: A Day in the Life
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
# A Day in the Life of a Certified Personal Trainer

Ruigsantos/Shutterstock.com

There are only a few specific times of day when most clients have the free time to meet with a fitness professional. While there are exceptions, most potential clients are generally available in the morning before work, during their lunch hour, and after work. In most markets, the popular times for clients to work with Certified Personal Trainers are from 5 a.m. to 9 a.m., 12 p.m. to 2 p.m., and 4 p.m. to 8 p.m. However, given the nature of the modern economy where many people work nontraditional jobs or have the freedom to work from home, it is becoming increasingly possible to meet with clients at all times of the day.

As fitness professionals takes on more clients, there will be many demands for their time (**Figure 2-2**). To establish a healthy work–life balance, it is important for a fitness professional to set and follow specific working hours. Being available at all hours might seem important when starting a personal training business, but fitness professionals should keep in mind that overextending oneself can lead to poor customer service and burnout. It is important to set guidelines for availability and adhere to them.

**A Sample Day in the Life of an NASM Certified Personal Trainer**

| Time | Activity |
|---|---|
| 5:00–6:00 a.m. | Wake up, get dressed, and commute to work |
| 6:00–9:00 a.m. | Train morning clients before they head to work |
| 9:00– a.m. | Roam the floor, clean equipment, and greet guests at the front desk |
| – a.m. | Personal workout time, includes filming for daily fitness tip on social media |
| – a.m. | Lunch |
|  a.m.–2:00 p.m. | Coach group workouts for lunchtime clients |
| 2:00–3:00 p.m. | Administrative time: client communication, program design for clients, and completion of any necessary paperwork |
| 3:00–4:00 p.m. | Break |
| 4:00–6:30 p.m. | Train evening clients |
| 6:30 p.m. | End of work day |

^**Figure 2-2** A day in the life^

In an effort to reduce the number of hours worked, while also increasing the amount of money earned, many Certified Personal Trainers are learning how to coach group workouts.

## Images

**Figure 2-2: ). To establish a healthy work–life balance, it is important for a fitness professional to set and follow specific working hours. Being available at all hours might seem important when starting a personal training business, but fitness professionals should keep in mind that overextending oneself can lead to poor customer service and burnout. It is important to set guidelines for availability and adhere to them.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH02_UNNUN08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533