---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Career Development
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
# TRAINING TIP

Even when working as a direct employee, fitness professionals should still behave as if they are running a personal business. Many employers require fitness professionals to set monthly production goals and then develop a business plan to help achieve those goals. Acting like a business owner when working for an employer can help a fitness professional establish a foundation for long-term career success. There are many factors to consider prior to making a commitment to an employer, including the following:

	- During the interview process, ask the potential employer about specific procedures for marketing and selling personal training. Many employers offer an onboarding process that teaches new fitness professionals how to conduct business in the facility, especially when it comes to the sales process. The interview process can help identify which employers offer the best options for career growth.

	- Identify facilities that attract specific client demographics such as older adults, athletes, or women only. Aspiring fitness professionals who desire to work with a specific population and develop a specialty niche can become successful by working in these facilities.

	- Uncover the flow of business throughout the day. A suburban facility may be busiest in the mornings before work; during the day because of stay-at-home parents, retirees, and high school kids; and in the evening after traditional work hours. An urban location will experience the highest volume of visits in the morning before work, during lunch time, and right after work, with periods of extremely slow time in between. Identify the busiest times of day for a prospective employer and then plan on being available to work with clients at those times.

	- Consider the daily commute. Be realistic about the costs and time associated with a daily trip to and from work, especially if planning on training clients first thing in the morning or late evenings.

	- Ask the interviewer about additional benefits, such as health insurance, paid time off, continuing education, and retirement savings through a 401(k) account. When deciding about employment, fitness professionals should consider the entire benefits package and not just the per-session compensation or hourly pay rate. Many employers in the fitness industry will offer professional development and education for their staff when first beginning employment and over the course of a career.

	- Research the reputation of the company. As employees, fitness professionals represent the facility, but they should keep in mind that the employer represents the employee as well. Fitness professionals should determine if their values are aligned with a prospective employer. For example, does the fitness facility emphasize providing remarkable customer service, rewarding employee successes, or maintaining a professional yet relaxed environment?