---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Common Barriers to Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
## Time

Chutima Chaochaiya/Shutterstock.com

Time is often cited as a barrier against many healthy behaviors, including exercise, proper food intake, and overall stress management. Balancing work, family, social obligations, healthy eating, and regular exercise comes as a challenge for most people. Fitness professionals can help individuals manage their time by finding ways to prioritize exercise. It is often stated that everyone has the same 24 hours in a day and that exercise simply needs to be a higher priority. While this is technically true, it is helpful to assess exactly how time is spent and determine the amount of physical activity that can realistically occur when setting attainable goals and managing expectations for results.

Time is often a top barrier to exercise, which is evident among adults of all ages (Ashton et  al., 2015; Kulavic et al., 2013). When someone is new to exercise, finding time to participate on a regular basis is one of the toughest challenges, especially when other activities may have to be limited. People have competing interests, and oftentimes, they find value in doing something other than exercise. For example, most people value their jobs because their job provides the income they need to sustain their lifestyle; therefore, time spent working is easily justified. Many individuals also have responsibilities to a significant other or children, or they provide care for other family members. Additionally, people value their social interactions and time spent simply relaxing.

One way to overcome the perceived barrier of a lack of time is to help clients address their approach to time management. Some ways to reclaim time for exercise can include rearranging schedules so that exercise becomes more of a priority. Committing to exercise as the first activity in the morning or immediately after work is one way for clients to put exercise ahead of competing activities. The fitness professional should help clients identify areas of life where there is no room for adjusting the schedule and then design a program that maximizes a client’s real ability to commit. When lack of time continues to be a barrier to physical activity, overall goals and the timeline to reach those goals need to be reassessed.

### TRAINING TIP

Whenever clients are unsure about their specific barriers, ask them to keep a log of how their time is spent over the course of a week. This will help identify their average sleep patterns and time dedicated to working, childcare, household chores, meal preparation, exercise, and leisure activities, such as watching television, spending time on a computer, reading, or just relaxing. By seeing a snapshot of an average week, it becomes easier to identify areas of improvement for time management so that priorities like exercise are always on the schedule.

## Unrealistic Goals

Setting goals is an important aspect of working with clients so that expectations are both realistic and somewhat challenging. New exercisers often fall into the trap of setting unrealistic goals and then becoming frustrated when goals are not met. Unrealistic goals can be anything from expecting to see extreme weight loss results in a short amount of time to completing a marathon before even attempting a 5K race. Goals need to have some flexibility so that adjustments can be made based on progress. Additionally, they need to be progressive so that smaller achievements along the way can help guide the client toward long-term goals.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH03_UNNUN04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533