---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Role of Psychology in Fitness and Wellness
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
When comparing active and inactive people, it’s not surprising that a mixture of motives exists with active individuals, who tend to be more motivated by physical fitness, improved psychological health, enjoyment, appearance, mastery of skills, and social interactions (Aaltonen et al., 2013). With the knowledge that active individuals have a variety of motives, fitness professionals can help clients determine their personal motivations about exercise and help shape their exercise program.

When learning about a client’s motivations, a fitness professional should be aware of two categories: (1) extrinsic motivation and (2) intrinsic motivation (**Figure 3-1**). People are not motivated exclusively by one or the other and will likely have motives represented by each. Either way, it is important to understand the difference between the two and when they may overlap.

### EXTRINSIC MOTIVATION

**Extrinsic motivation** focuses on doing an activity for some type of recognition, such as earning a trophy or award; it relies on looking forward to something if a specific behavior is achieved. Rewards can be large or small but should match the achievement. For example, exercising 3 days a week for 1 month could be rewarded with a new pair of shoes, whereas completing a marathon that required months of training might be rewarded with a vacation.

Extrinsic motivation to exercise may come in the form of social recognition, rewards from competitions, or the improvement of physical appearance. Achieving rewards brings about a sense of satisfaction that may not come from the day-to-day exercise routine. The concern with an emphasis on extrinsic motivation is that it may not sustain exercise adherence because once a reward is achieved, there may not be any further incentive to continue, therefore long-term exercise participation will likely be associated with some level of intrinsic motivation.

### INTRINSIC MOTIVATION

**Intrinsic motivation** has received more attention because it relates to long-term exercise adherence; it is described as the motivation that comes from within a person. In contrast to extrinsic motivation, it is not about rewards but more about pursuing activities that are interesting or meaningful to that individual. Intrinsically motivated individuals enjoy the process and see value in the journey. People who are intrinsically motivated to exercise likely enjoy being physically active and appreciate all the physical and psychological benefits that exercise can bring. Intrinsic motivation may include exercising for stress relief, increasing energy, and finding new ways to be challenged physically.

## Key Terms

**Extrinsic motivation**
When someone participates in an activity or behavior for some type of reward or recognition from others.

**Intrinsic motivation**
When people engage in an activity or behavior because they feel a sense of satisfaction.

## Images

**Figure 3-1: Intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH03_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533