---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Psychological Benefits of Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
## Improves Self-Esteem and Body Image

**Self-esteem** and **body image** are psychological variables associated with a number of health concerns, including depression, eating disorders, and exercise addiction. The serious implications of these conditions make these variables important to monitor, especially in populations that may be at a higher risk of developing habits that could lead to poor mental and physical health. Self-esteem and body image have long been connected to each other due to the reciprocal nature of the two, meaning that people with low self-esteem may also have body image issues and having body image issues can lead people to having low self-esteem (**Figure 3-3**).

Self-esteem refers to the way someone evaluates their own self-worth; it has different domains such as physical, emotional, and social. Physical self-esteem has subdomains that include people’s self-perception of their own fitness levels, the attractiveness level of their physiques, their physical strength, and their competence level at sports (Hausenblas & Rhodes, 2017). Body image, generally defined as the way people view their physical selves, can be based on the way people visualize their bodies or how they feel in their own skins. Body image may not match reality; people may view their bodies in a negative way and evaluate themselves inaccurately (Hausenblas & Rhodes, 2017). These variables and the way they relate to fitness will vary among populations because body ideals are different for men and women and between cultures.

For example, muscular strength has historically been important for men and their self-esteem, but not as much for women (Ciccolo et al., 2016). While body image has been studied extensively, there is still some confusion within the general population, where body image is viewed only as a “women’s problem” of negativity (Bailey et al., 2017). In light of this, another study found that both aerobic and resistance training improved overall body image in women with preexisting body image concerns, which demonstrates that appropriate exercise can improve these variables (Martin Ginis et al., 2014). But regardless of biological sex, weight loss and weight management are related to both self-esteem and body image. For example, in a long-term study, both self-esteem and body image were positively influenced when previously obese adolescents lost weight in their young adult years (Watts et al., 2016).

## Key Terms

**Self-esteem**
The way someone evaluates their own self-worth physically, emotionally, and socially.

**Body image**
The way someone views their physical self or visualizes their body.

## Images

**Figure 3-3: The relationship between exercise, self-esteem, and body image**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH03_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533