---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Role of Psychology in Fitness and Wellness
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
There are countless subtopics within the field of psychology including clinical, developmental, social, health, and sport and exercise psychology (American Psychological Association, 2019). Sport and exercise psychology focuses on aspects such as understanding participants’ motives and barriers to physical activity, ways the environment affects exercise behavior, social influences on exercise, psychological benefits of exercise, and the psychological factors that affect long-term exercise adherence. Applying some of the psychological principles associated with successful behavioral change will help clients adjust to a more active lifestyle.

### CRITICAL

Fitness professionals should be aware of the psychological variables that affect behavioral change, such as motivation and social influence, but should never attempt to counsel individuals with mental disorders. Only trained and licensed healthcare professionals (e.g., physicians, psychiatrists, psychologists) are qualified to treat these individuals.

## Motivation

In the context of psychology and behavioral change, **motivation **is a term used to describe the intensity and direction of someone’s effort, whereas* intensity *refers to the amount of effort expended, and *direction *refers to whether or not someone seeks out a behavior (Weinberg & Gould, 2019c). In general, individuals who seek out a certain behavior typically put forth an effort toward success, therefore intensity and direction are often related. For example, if someone has a strong desire to lose weight, they will be drawn toward behaviors, such as regular exercise and diet modification, and will likely put forth an intense effort to achieve results.

Understanding the motivation to exercise is an area of interest for most fitness professionals, because it allows for a personalized approach when coaching clients toward their goals. Research has shown that motives differ between populations. For example, men and women tend to have different motivations to exercise than do younger versus older adults. Differences in motivation may also be observed based on culture, **socioeconomic status**, or the surrounding environment. It is important to assess motivation on an individual basis because it can vary greatly. Also, motivation is a dynamic variable, meaning it can change both in the short and the long term.

Someone may start an exercise program to lose weight, but as participation continues, the motives may shift to include reducing stress, increasing strength, or developing camaraderie with other exercisers. Motivation can also change abruptly based on receiving information, such as a newly revealed health concern, or an upcoming event like a wedding or family reunion. Sometimes motivation comes instantaneously from the fitness professional; for example, if a client is feeling tired and therefore not putting in a typical effort, words of encouragement from the fitness professional can inspire motivation to increase intensity and effort.

When people are not motivated to do something, it is referred to as **amotivation**. When people are amotivated to exercise, they may not participate at all, or they will participate by only going through the motions without any intensity or belief in the positive outcomes that exercise may yield. For example, some clients may be exercising only because a significant other or a physician said they must be more active, otherwise they are amotivated to exercise. In such in-stances, it is important to dig deeper to try and help the client realize the value in participating, or at least believe in possible outcomes, to help establish some motive that can be used as a building block.

## Key Terms

**Motivation**
The intensity and direction of someone’s effort to participate in an activity or engage in a behavior.

**Socioeconomic status**
The social standing of a person or group that includes education, income, and occupation.

**Amotivation**
Describes when someone is not motivated to engage in an activity or behavior.