---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Psychological Benefits of Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# Psychological Benefits of Exercise

The positive benefits of exercise go far beyond a physical transformation. The psychological benefits of exercise are well established and can be experienced over both the short and long term. Some of the known psychological benefits to exercise include improved mood, increased self-esteem, increased positive body image, better sleep, and decreased levels of depression and anxiety. Conversely, sedentary behavior has been linked to an increase in depression. This relationship can be partially explained by sedentary people experiencing limitations with their movement, problems with sleep and low energy, some levels of pain and discomfort with movement, and higher levels of anxiety (Stubbs et al., 2018).

What may not be as clear is whether sedentary behavior leads to increased depression, or whether depression leads a person toward sedentary behavior, which leads to poor health status. There is also growing evidence that physical activity of moderate intensity may be the most effective approach. In one study, aerobic exercise of moderate intensity improved self-perceptions of strength and muscular development and improved feelings of autonomy and well-being (Delextrat et al., 2016). Many of the psychological benefits from exercise are experienced together; for example, depression may improve along with better sleep and improved social interactions. In general, there is an association between being physically active and having a greater sense of well-being. For example, inactive people rated their health and satisfaction with life lower than those who exercised  (Pelletier et al., 2017). Regardless of the reason why someone decides to exercise, psychological benefits will inevitably occur and may help reinforce the behavior.

Jemastock/Shutterstock.com

## Promotes Positive Mood

The term *mood *refers to how someone feels; it is considered a more long-term state of mind, unlike emotion, which is a short-term reaction to a situation (Brehm, 2014). People will often define their mood as “good” or “bad” based on the way they generally feel. Many factors affecting mood can include being fatigued, experiencing success or failure, and hearing good or bad news. Many people express mood with their nonverbal communication: body language, tone of voice, and eye contact. Mood can also help foster relationships and social interactions, because people will often be drawn toward others who regularly demonstrate a good mood or positive energy. Researchers are often interested in the way that a single bout of exercise affects mood in the short-term and how long-term participation influences overall mood. Exercise has demonstrated a generally favorable effect on various mood profiles with durations anywhere from 10 to 60 minutes, making even short bouts of exercise effective in improving mood (Crush et al., 2018; Fritz & O’Connor, 2016).

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH03_UNNUN08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533