---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Social Influences on Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
### INSTRUMENTAL SUPPORT

**Instrumental support** describes the actual actions of a person that help another person engage in a behavior. These actions directly facilitate the behavior, such as removing a barrier. For some individuals, this type of support is crucial for exercise adherence because if help is not provided, a physical barrier may not be overcome. This includes transportation to the gym or health club, childcare responsibilities, and financial considerations.

#### HELPFUL HINT

When recalling the purpose of social support, keep in mind that there are always two components to consider: who and what. Who is providing the support? This can be a significant other, family member, friend, coworker, healthcare provider, or fitness professional. What type of support is given? This can be instrumental, emotional, informational, or companionship.

Driving someone to a fitness facility, babysitting, or paying for someone’s gym membership are all ways of providing instrumental support. Additionally, with lack of time often cited as a top barrier, anything that helps create more available time would also be instrumental. Examples of this would be doing things for someone such as grocery shopping, transporting children to events, or cooking. It can also be gestures like taking someone shopping to find proper workout attire or packing a gym bag for a significant other. Regardless of the type of instrumental support, it will likely have a positive impact for someone who is trying to exercise regularly.

### EMOTIONAL SUPPORT

Overall, **emotional support** is considered very important for people to start and continue with an exercise program. It refers to the encouragement and positive reinforcement that is provided and includes being caring and empathetic and showing concern. Some examples are telling individuals that they are doing great with exercising, asking how their workouts are going, or allowing them to vent when they are frustrated with their progress.

## Key Terms

**Emotional support**
The encouragement and positive reinforcement that is provided from an individual to another, which includes being caring, empathetic, and showing concern.