---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Role of Psychology in Fitness and Wellness
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
The role of psychology can also extend to some clinical issues, such as exercise addiction or poor body image issues associated with eating disorders, which are beyond the scope of practice for a Certified Personal Trainer. Overall, fitness professionals can better serve their clients by using many tools related to psychology. In particular, excellent communication skills should be practiced, because both listening and explaining are critically important in making sure that an accurate exchange of information has taken place.

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Communication is a very important aspect of psychology; the right questions need to be asked and answers need to be heard. Other important aspects of communication are nonverbal cues, which can include body language, body position, overall appearance, eye contact, tone of voice, facial expressions, and gestures. Nonverbal cues are very powerful because if a person’s nonverbal cues indicate that they are not interested or are bored or defensive, regardless of what is being said, then it is likely that a message hasn’t been effectively conveyed or received.

## The Science of Psychology

Psychology is an area of science that focuses on people; in particular, it is focused on how the mind and feelings may influence different behaviors. Psychology examines the relationships between brain functionality and human behavior and the environmental effect on behavior (American Psychological Association, 2019). The people who specialize in the science of psychology are either psychologists or psychiatrists. These licensed individuals are highly educated and trained to observe behaviors, listen to patients, and help people adjust their behaviors or cope with a variety of situations.

Photographee.eu/Shutterstock.com

Psychologists and psychiatrists are employed in many areas such as the healthcare industry, educational settings, counseling, law enforcement, and even athletics. They can work as consultants to different industries with an interest in human behavior, or with individuals struggling with mental health issues such as depression or anxiety, or an athlete who has difficulty focusing. All fitness professionals need to remain within their scope of practice; they should not attempt to diagnose, assess, or analyze an individual with mental illness as only a qualified medical professional can do, such as a psychologist or psychiatrist. However, some aspects of psychology may be helpful when working with people who are trying to change behaviors. Having a firm understanding of a client’s concerns and reasons for wanting to exercise will go a long way toward providing excellent service to clients.

### GETTING TECHNICAL

Psychologists and psychiatrists have similar duties, because both professionals are focused on counseling individuals with mental illness. The main difference is the type of education obtained by each professional and the ability to prescribe medications. Depending on the country, psychologists have earned at minimum a master’s degree and, in most cases, a doctorate and can assess patients with mental illness, but they are limited to treating with psychotherapy in most cases. By contrast, a psychiatrist has a medical degree, is trained in general medicine, and has completed a four-year residency in psychiatry. After obtaining a medical degree, a psychiatrist can also prescribe medications in addition to administering psychotherapy.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH03_UNNUN02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533