---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Motivational Interviewing
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# Motivational Interviewing

Effective communication needs to be implemented, and great Certified Personal Trainers have a certain way of engaging with people that helps make the change process smooth. They help clients understand and voice their own reasons for change. Even though **motivational interviewing** and the Transtheoretical Model were developed separately, the stages of change make explicit reference to concepts such as ambivalence, which is the defining feature of the contemplation phase. Motivational interviewing provides directions for how to get clients out of the contemplation phase, over their ambivalence, and ready to act.

## Introduction to Motivational Interviewing

Motivational interviewing is a method of client-centric coaching that helps enhance the desire to change by resolving a client’s feelings of ambivalence (Miller & Rollnick, 2013). It is an empathetic, collaborative, nonconfrontational, goal-oriented style of communication that helps clients discover their own personal reasons for making a change in their life. Motivational interviewing recognizes that everyone has different levels of readiness for changing a behavior, so it is important to gain an understanding of why individuals would want to change and also the things that might cause them to feel ambivalent about that change. Everyone has times where they can get stuck in a state of ambivalence over something, so the ultimate goal of motivational interviewing is to help clients solidify their mind state and increase personal motivation for change (Miller & Rollnick, 2013).

Ambivalence occurs when the positives and negatives surrounding a potential change are equal with each other, creating a situation where the individual is unsure of which side of a decision is best. In a situation of ambivalence, the demands between two behaviors are essentially competing with each other. For example, a client may be excited by the prospect of making workouts part of the normal routine, but after putting in long hours at the office, the desire to visit with family and rest on the couch may be just as appealing. Ambivalence is a completely normal part of the change process and represents one of the key areas in which a Certified Personal Trainer can help a client. If a client is struggling with ambivalence, it typically means they are in the contemplation stage.

## Applying Motivational Interviewing

Motivational interviewing uses targeted questions to help clients visualize their ideal state of being to develop a higher sense of intrinsic motivation to make a change in their life. During the process, statements and questions are specifically chosen to either help a client maintain a current positive behavior or craft the thought process around changing a negative one. The proper application of motivational interviewing helps avoid arguments and, instead, works to instill feelings of being ready, willing, and able to change in the mind of the client.

### SELF-DISCREPANCY

A **self-discrepancy** is an internal conflict between what someone thinks their ideal self should be and what the actual self is (**Figure 4-3**). The way that discrepancies drive behavior can be thought of as part of a feedback loop. People take in information about their current self, and if a discrepancy is perceived between where they currently are and the ideal version of where they think they should be, they perform behaviors to reduce the discrepancy between the two states. For example, if a client’s idealized best self is a person who exercises four times per week, but in reality they only exercise sporadically, that realization of a discrepancy may be just the information needed to trigger an increased desire to change.

Without a perceived discrepancy, there is no motivation (Miller & Rollnick, 2013). If individuals believe they are living in what they already consider to be ideal, then the best option is to stay the same.

## Key Terms

**Motivational interviewing**
Client-centered, directive method for enhancing intrinsic motivation to change by exploring and resolving ambivalence.

**Self-discrepancy**
An internal conflict that occurs when an individual compares their actual self with their ideal self.

## Images

**Figure 4-3: Self-discrepancy**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH04_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533