---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Stages of Change Model
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
### GETTING TECHNICAL

A sixth stage of the original Transtheoretical Model, called termination (Prochaska & Velicer, 1997), also exists but has little to no application to exercise adherence. For smoking cessation, the termination phase represents the point at which an individual no longer has any desire to smoke ever again with no risk of relapse. When it comes to exercise, busy lifestyles make it virtually impossible to stick to a dedicated exercise plan forever. For that reason, even the most dedicated athletes will shift between preparation, action, and maintenance.

The Stages of Change model also includes processes of change, self-efficacy, and **decisional balance**. People move through the stages of change by using behavioral and cognitive processes of change strategies. For example, fitness-promoting behaviors are influenced by self-monitoring strategies, along with enhanced confidence and perceived benefits of resistance training (Cardinal & Kosma, 2004; Harada et al., 2008). Decisional balance refers to the process of weighing the positive and negative outcomes of engaging in or increasing exercise behavior. As benefits increase and negatives decrease, people move toward the maintenance end of the stages of change continuum (Spencer et al. 2006).

Processes of change provide strategies on how to apply BCTs. In early stages, clients may apply cognitive processes to progress through stages. In later stages, they rely more on behavioral processes for progressing toward maintenance. For example, an individual in the contemplation phase may benefit more from information about the health benefits for exercise (a cognitive process) than they would from adding cues or prompts to engage in exercise (a behavioral process). Certified Personal Trainers need to work differently with clients who are in different stages of change. They will need to tailor their use of BCTs and recommendations to the clients’ readiness to make positive changes in their lives.

## Precontemplation

Individuals may be in the precontemplation stage because they are not informed about the consequences of inactivity or they do not know about the health benefits of exercise. Alternatively, they may have tried before, failed to feel confident or maintain consistency, and have become demoralized by their inability to stick with an exercise routine in the past. These people may be categorized as being ambivalent to exercise. Cognitive strategies may be the best option for those in the precontemplation stage.

Additionally, gaining knowledge and education may be exactly what some individuals need to increase their perceived value of exercise. Certified Personal Trainers should work to understand any perceived negatives surrounding exercise and help clients dispel any myths. For example, some clients may think resistance training requires hours spent in the gym each day, so the fitness professional can teach them that only 30 to 60 minutes of focused resistance programming 2 to 4 days per week to gain significant health benefits are needed.

That said, Certified Personal Trainers will not usually work with people in the precontemplation stage as it pertains to beginning exercise from a sedentary state. The simple act of walking into the gym means a person is at least already thinking about making healthy life changes. However, a client could still be in precontemplation as it pertains to a progression in their program. For example, a potential client could be in the maintenance stage for the goal of exercising two times per week, but they could be in the precontemplation stage for a progression to exercising three times per week to better meet goals.

## Key Terms

**Decisional balance**
Reflects the clients’ weighing of the pros and cons of changing.