---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Stages of Change Model
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
Similarly, a client could be in precontemplation for starting resistance training but already be in the action stage for aerobic exercise and recreational physical activity.

## Contemplation

Because individuals in the contemplation stage are considering becoming more active, fitness professionals can have a great deal of influence on what they choose to do. Certified Personal Trainers need to be able to listen to the needs and desires of those in the contemplation stage and help them connect those goals with exercise-based solutions. People in contemplation begin to see more value in exercise participation, but misconceptions may still be present. In fact, an equal balance between benefits and negatives (i.e., being of two minds about something) may produce ambivalence. These individuals may not be ready to act immediately, so Certified Personal Trainers need to support them in any way that they can.

WAYHOME studio/Shutterstock.com

Similar to precontemplation, education is one of the best strategies to use with people in contemplation, because they sometimes just need more information to boost their perceived value of an exercise program. For these individuals, it is important to discuss ways to deal with their perceived negatives surrounding exercise. Individuals in this stage of change are also low in self-efficacy; they may want to do it but are not sure they can, so they hesitate to start. Small achievable goals help people in contemplation build self-efficacy and gain momentum.

## Preparation

People in the preparation stage are working on their plan to change. They may have already joined a gym, or they may already exercise sporadically but are planning to start a formal weekly exercise plan within the next month. This is a stage where fitness professionals will most likely meet the most individuals. They know they want to start exercising, and they are making the right moves to join a club and potentially even attend a personal training consultation. Individuals in this stage may already partake in multiple forms of physical activity, just without any form of structure or consistency.

Fitness professionals can help clients plan when, where, and how to fit exercise into their schedule. The preparation stage is all about establishing a plan that clients feel confident they can follow. Building intrinsic motivation for exercise is also important for developing consistency in this group. For that reason, motivational interviewing, which is discussed later in this chapter, can be a highly beneficial BCT to use with all new potential clients, helping to uncover their underlying desires and turn a plan into action.

## Action

Action is the stage in which clients have been consistently exercising for up to 6 months. In this stage, it is important to not allow short-term slip-ups to turn into a departure from the exercise program. Fitness professionals should continue to discuss barriers to exercise and help clients anticipate any potential roadblocks that could arise. To help with this, specific plans should be put in place in advance if a client misses a scheduled session with suggestions for maintaining progress, such as supplying preplanned “emergency” workouts that they can do from home.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH04_UNNUN04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533