---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Supplementation Guidelines and Labels
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Supplement labels in the European Union and United Kingdom are fairly similar to those in the United States. However, supplements in the European Union (and some other countries) that contain any vitamins and minerals will list the percent nutrient reference value (%NRV) instead of using the term *%DV* (**Figure 10-3**). Values for the NRV and RDA are essentially the same; the change in nomenclature from RDA to NRV in the European Union and United Kingdom is for EU labeling guidelines. Similar to the %DV in the United States, the %NRV indicates what percentage of the recommended amount of a vitamin or mineral is provided in the specified serving (and/or 100 g) of a dietary supplement. Consumers can use the %NRV to evaluate a dietary supplement and see how it contributes to their daily needs for a vitamin or mineral and how it may fit into the context of their diet.

### CURRENT GOOD MANUFACTURING PROCESSES

Current Good Manufacturing Processes are established by the FDA in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 Part 111. The main purpose of this is to prevent contamination and adulteration of dietary supplement products. It provides guidelines for the personnel involved; the site of manufacture, equipment used, records maintained; and the processes used to ensure the quality and purity of the dietary supplements produced.

#### CRITICAL

Understand that ingredients hidden within a proprietary blend may be purposefully underdosed or dosed too high. This is not always the case, but it often means the product contains less than an optimal dose of the contents within the blend. It is generally recommended to look for dietary supplements with full disclosure or to contact the company for amounts of each ingredient.

## Images

**Figure 10-3: Nutrient reference values**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH10_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533