---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Health Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Riboflavin deficiency is uncommon except in athletes and pregnant mothers who are also vegetarian or vegan, both of whom have increased need coupled with the potential for inadequate consumption. Deficiency symptoms often show as endocrine (hormone) disruptions, which could also cause excess weight retention.

Niacin deficiency is no longer common in developed countries, but it may occur due to an inborn metabolism error. Deficiency presents as **pellagra**, a disease first characterized by a skin rash, leading to digestive and mood disorders, **anorexia**, and death if left untreated.

Vitamin B6 deficiency is also uncommon. It tends to only occur in developed countries if there is another disease, such as kidney disease or alcoholism. If it does occur, B6 deficiency produces **anemia**, **dermatitis**, and immune disruption.

Folate deficiency can also cause anemia, but it is primarily associated with neural tube defects in newborns, such as **spina bifida**. Therefore, folate is one of the primary prenatal vitamins.

Finally, B12 deficiency, too, can result in anemia and may also produce fatigue, and neurological disruptions like numbness, confusion, and poor memory—the neurological symptoms present prior to detectable anemia. B12 deficiency is more common in vegetarians and older adults who have decreased intake and ability to absorb B12, respectively. Because fortified grain products are the only plant-based foods that are a good source of B12, those avoiding animal products are advised to include a B12 supplement.

#### CHOLINE

Choline was once considered a B vitamin and later removed from that classification; it is now considered vitamin-like. Until 2018, the FDA did not allow companies to list choline on a nutrition facts label, but with the Food Safety and Modernization Act, a DV was set for choline at 550 mg per day, reflecting the National Academy of Medicine’s adequate intake level. Despite being overlooked, choline is a known essential nutrient for liver, neurological, and cardiovascular health.

Most Americans do not achieve adequate intake of choline. Men average a daily intake of 402 mg and women 278 mg. In fact, 90% of individuals have insufficient choline intake (Wallace & Fulgoni, 2016). Interestingly, that number is reduced to just 43% when individuals consume eggs, and egg consumers have an average intake of 525 mg daily versus 294 mg in non-consumers (Wallace & Fulgoni, 2017). The United Kingdom, Canada, China, France, Greece, Italy, and Mexico have similar intakes of 263–407 mg (Wiedeman et al., 2018).

Choline deficiency may cause muscle or liver damage, but this severity is uncommon despite observed inadequate intake. While choline deficiency may cause liver problems, excessive choline intake can cause liver toxicity as well as more mild symptoms, such as vomiting, body odor, and hypotension (low blood pressure) (Institute of Medicine, 1998).

### MINERALS

There are 16 essential minerals of which 14 are required on nutrition facts labels and on supplement facts if claims are made about that ingredient: calcium, iron, phosphorus, iodine, magnesium, zinc, selenium, copper, manganese, chromium, molybdenum, chloride, sodium, and potassium. The two remaining minerals are sulfur and fluoride, which are unlikely to appear on a supplement facts label. Minerals may be divided into macrominerals and trace minerals.

## Key Terms

**Pellagra**
A niacin or tryptophan deficiency that leads to a skin rash (dermatitis), digestive disorders (diarrhea), and mood or cognitive decline (dementia).

**Anorexia**
A loss of appetite or the conscious decision to avoid eating, often leading to dangerously low body weight and/or malnourishment.

**Anemia**
A condition of poor iron status.

**Dermatitis**
Inflammation of the skin, rashes, excessive dryness, and/or blistering.

**Spina biﬁda**
A birth defect, and type of neural tube defect, when the spine and spinal cord do not form properly.