---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Ergogenic Aids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Protein

All proteins are composed of **amino acids**. For human nutrition, there are 20 relevant amino acids; 11 are **nonessential amino acids**, and nine are **essential amino acids (EAAs)**, and of those nine, three are the **branched chain amino acids (BCAAs)**—leucine, isoleucine, and valine (**Table 10-6**). Protein and amino acids are principally used to augment muscle size and recovery by increasing rates of **muscle protein synthesis (MPS)**.

There are two primary factors to consider for MPS to occur. First, the correct conditions and signals must be present. Second, the material must be available to assemble muscle proteins. There are a few signals that influence MPS, but the most important dietary factor is a single amino acid: leucine.

**TABLE 10-6 Amino Acids**

| Essential | Nonessential | Conditionally Essential |
|---|---|---|
| Leucine^ | Alanine | Histidine |
| Isoleucine^ | Arginine* | Arginine |
| Valine^ | Aspartic acid | Glutamine |
| Methionine | Asparagine |  |
| Phenylalanine | Cysteine |  |
| Threonine | Glutamic acid |  |
| Tryptophan | Glutamine* |  |
| Lysine | Glycine |  |
| Histidine* | Proline |  |
|  | Serine |  |
|  | Tyrosine |  |

^^Branched chain amino acid^

^*The amino acid may become conditionally essential under certain circumstances.^

When comparing rates of MPS in response to whole protein, EAA, nonessential amino acids, BCAA, and the individual BCAAs, only the treatments containing leucine (protein, EAA, BCAA, and leucine alone) are capable of significantly increasing MPS (Garlick, 2005).

### GETTING TECHNICAL

Although leucine increases MPS signaling, proteins cannot be formed if the requisite amino acids and energy (calories/ATP) are not available.

More recently, there has been controversy that leucine and the BCAAs do not work, which is only true if extending the phrase to include that they “don’t work in isolation.” They increase MPS as long as the other material is available to form the proteins. In the absence of other EAA and energy, BCAA supplementation may be insufficient for MPS.

The absolute quantity of leucine required to maximally increase MPS likely increases with body size. Some indications suggest doses of 0.05 g leucine per kg body weight per meal to ensure maximal MPS (Norton & Wilson, 2009), and that signal lasts for about 3 hours (Wilson et al., 2011).

As animal proteins have more leucine, they are considered better than plant proteins for muscle growth. Diets consumed for 76 days with protein coming from wheat (6.8% leucine), soy (8%), egg (9%), or whey (11%) demonstrated rates of muscle enlargement and body fat reduction in relation to the leucine content of the protein. Specifically, muscle growth and fat loss were greatest with whey, followed by egg, then soy, and finally wheat (Norton et al., 2010).

Therefore, if the goal is maximizing muscle growth (or recovery), consuming meals with adequate, high-quality proteins (or BCAA/EAA) every 3 to 4 hours may be the best approach. For clients, first focusing on the total protein amount is appropriate, followed by protein quality, then protein timing (when to consume).

## Key Terms

**Amino acids**
Organic building blocks of proteins containing both a carboxyl and an amino group.

**Nonessential amino acids**
Amino acids that can be synthesized by the body and do not, under normal circumstances, need to be obtained in the diet.

**Essential amino acid (EAA)**
Amino acid that must be obtained through the diet as the body does not make it; there are nine essential amino acids.

**Branched chain amino acids  (BCAAs)**
The three essential amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) that are abundant in skeletal muscle tissue and named for their branchlike structures.

**Muscle protein synthesis (MPS)**
Process by which new muscle proteins are formed and a muscle grows or repairs at the molecular level.