---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Ergogenic Aids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Dietary supplements containing banned substances typically will not state on the label that they contain the substance. Rather, the banned substance will be present in the product without being listed on the label to provide the user with a desired effect, such as strength, that is then attributed to the ingredients on the supplement’s label. Due to the sheer number of supplement companies operating, the FDA is not able to vet all dietary supplements, and it is therefore best for fitness professionals and their clients to only use dietary supplements from brands that are third-party tested and have sufficient evidence of effectiveness.

# TRAINING TIP

What do you do when clients insist on using steroids or other harmful substances? The clients likely already know that what they are doing is dangerous, and they are going to expect that their Certified Personal Trainer, parents, doctor, coach, friends, and others will disapprove. Simply telling them, no, is unlikely to change their mind.

Say no, but if that fails, there is more you can do. As with many other situations, explain to them that they should still seek the advice of their medical doctor for reducing the potential for side effects and managing symptoms and recording their blood work, so they know the effects the substances are producing.

Banned substances are not to be taken lightly. This group of ingredients is the most dangerous to use, and under no circumstance is it wise to recommend their use to clients. In fact, clients wishing to use these substances should be educated on the risks involved, at least by the fitness professional and, preferably, by their doctor who can better determine an appropriate course of action if the clients choose to continue using. Dietary supplements may contain banned substances, but they are often not present on the label of the dietary supplement. For this reason, it is wise to avoid recommending supplements that are not independently tested or have anecdotal reports of results that are too good to be true.