---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Supplementation Guidelines and Labels
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The adjusted ruleset also allows a more prominent listing of **active ingredients**. However, the exact quantities of individual, nonmandatory ingredients are not required. A common tactic used by companies to preserve a trade secret or retain intellectual property is to include several active ingredients in a proprietary blend and list the total amount of the proprietary blend. As consumer education grows, more companies are choosing to avoid proprietary blends in favor of fully disclosed active ingredients, and fitness professionals can likely find any supplement they would like to try available in this format.

Unlike the active ingredients, which are required to provide an amount whether for the individual ingredients or the blend in which they are present, inactive or **other ingredients** only need to be listed in descending order by weight. Typically, the other ingredients are sweeteners, flavors, and/or acids used to make the product more palatable or to prevent clumping. These could include compounds, such as sucralose (a sugar substitute), natural flavors, or citric acid. The other ingredients section may be of interest for those looking to avoid artificial sweeteners or nondisclosed calories. For example, maltodextrin, a food additive, or other inexpensive carbohydrates, may be used as filler to add weight to the serving size. Other ingredients are typically used to help keep the product dry and prevent mold or bacteria growth, while many other ingredients are used to enhance taste, texture, or color.

Products containing macronutrients, such as protein, carbohydrates, fat, or micronutrients (vitamins and minerals), need to be listed at the top of the **supplement facts panel** in grams, milligrams, or, in some cases, micrograms. Furthermore, if a **daily value (DV)** is established, it must be listed as a percentage of the established DV. A complete list of the established DVs for the United States can be found in **Table 10-2**. Other countries tend to have recommendations similar to those of the United States, though with their own interpretations and messages. For example, the latest European Food Safety Authority guidelines broadly advise macronutrients as a percentage of energy. Although the United States does the same, the values are precalculated and based on a 2,000-calorie diet.

**TABLE 10-2 Recommended Daily Values of Macronutrients**

|  |  | Adults | Pregnant and Lactating Women |
|---|---|---|---|
| Nutrient | Unit of Measure (gram, milligram) | DV | DV |
| Protein | g | 50 | 71 |
| Fat | g | 78 | 78 |
| Saturated fat | g | 20 | 20 |
| Cholesterol | mg | 300 | 300 |
| Total carbohydrate | g | 275 | 275 |
| Sodium | mg | 2,300 | 2,300 |
| Dietary fiber | g | 28 | 28 |
| Added sugars | g | 50 | 50 |

^*Note*: The DV is established based on the recommendations for adults and children 4 years and older (U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, 2019b).^

## Key Terms

**Active ingredient**
Any component of a dietary supplement included for the purpose of causing a physiologic effect; displayed on the main body of the supplement facts panel.

**Other ingredient**
Any component of a dietary supplement included for taste, bulk, or as a preservative; displayed beneath the main body of the supplement facts panel.

**Supplement facts panel**
Portion of a dietary supplement’s label that displays the active ingredients, other ingredients, serving size, number of servings, quantity of ingredients, and the percent daily value.

**Daily value (DV)**
Amount of a nutrient recommended to be consumed each day to maintain good health. Based on a 2,000-calorie diet for those ages 4 years and older.