---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Supplementation Guidelines and Labels
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
In addition to vitamins and minerals, other dietary supplements may lead to adverse effects when used at higher doses than recommended. While others may not produce adverse effects, they often do not improve results when taken in greater doses than recommended. Most notable are **stimulants**, which walk a fine line between no effect, a positive effect, and an adverse effect. Conversely, **creatine** is not known to cause toxicity effects, but it also poses no greater benefit when used in greater than recommended doses (Kreider et al., 2017).

While regulations for dietary supplements do exist, supplements can be brought to market in most countries without prior government approval. This results in potential safety issues, such as containing new and untested ingredients, containing undisclosed ingredients, or containing illegal ingredients like **banned **stimulants or **anabolic steroids**. As rarely as it may occur, it is important to understand that not all dietary supplements should be trusted unconditionally. Thus, the following guidelines for responsible use are recommended:

	- Do not use or recommend dietary supplements without first checking the label and reviewing the published literature on the supplement or the supplement’s ingredients.

	- Do not exceed the recommended dose of a dietary supplement.

	- Look for supplements with a fully disclosed list of active ingredients; avoid proprietary blends until more is known about what specific ingredients the supplement contains.

	- Do not recommend supplements to those younger than 18 years, unless prescribed by a medical professional. Supplements are intended for adult use only.

	- Different dietary supplements should not be taken together or “stacked” without reasonable certainty that the supplements will not interact to produce an adverse event. Dietary supplements should not be used with medication. Nutrient–drug interactions can occur, and clients using medication should check with their physician prior to using supplements.

	- Those with a medical condition should not use dietary supplements without first asking their physician.

## Dietary Supplement Labels

The ability to interpret and dissect a dietary supplement label is important for determining its quality and safety. The fitness professional must pay careful attention to the ingredients and whether the supplement facts are transparent, if claims are exaggerated, and if the product contains any allergens or other material that may have contraindications for use.

### DIETARY SUPPLEMENT LABEL REQUIREMENTS

Dietary supplements have a label very similar to food labels, and all dietary supplement labels have minimum requirements for their labels. These include displaying the name of the supplement, the net quantity of contents, all ingredients, nutrition, and the name and place of the business. These labels appear quite similar to food labels but do have minor differences to allow for common exemptions. For example, while calories are a mandatory listing for food products, many supplements do not list calories, because they are not present. Supplement facts are required to list all of the following only if they are present in the product in quantities that cannot be listed as zero: total calories, total fat, saturated fat, trans fat, cholesterol, sodium, total carbohydrate, dietary fiber, total sugars, added sugars, protein, vitamin D, calcium, iron, and potassium. Nutrition facts differ from supplement facts, because they always list major nutrients, regardless of their quantity. Calories from saturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, monounsaturated fat, soluble fiber, insoluble fiber, and sugar alcohol may be declared, but they must be declared when a claim is made about them. Other ingredients must be listed somewhere, but whether to list them as an active or other ingredient is the prerogative of the supplement company, unless a claim is made (U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, 2019a).

## Key Terms

**Stimulant**
An agent that increases physiologic or metabolic activity. Common stimulants include caffeine and nicotine.

**Creatine**
Molecule made from amino acids and used as a dietary supplement to facilitate adenosine triphosphate regeneration for improved training capacity, strength, power, and muscle mass.

**Banned**
A dietary supplement that may be prohibited from use in a specific sport or sport league. These supplements may not be illegal or prohibited at all times during the year.

**Anabolic steroid**
Compound made from testosterone or another hormone that acts on hormone receptors to produce increases in muscle size or strength.