---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Supplementation Guidelines and Labels
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### THIRD-PARTY VERIFICATION

Perhaps the quickest and easiest way for the fitness professional to identify trusted supplements is to look for third-party verification on the label. Dietary supplement companies may elect to submit their products for testing by an independent party, and in return, they are permitted to use the independent party’s trademark to show that their products are trusted, quality products. However, it is important to note that third-party testing is an expense that smaller companies may not be able to afford, and therefore, the absence of independent verification does not mean that the supplement should not be trusted by that fact alone. The most common third-party entities are Informed Choice and National Sanitation Foundation (now known as NSF International).

Informed Choice caters to athletes by testing for banned substances according to the World Anti-Doping Association (WADA). To carry the Informed Choice logo, a company must have its manufacturing process audited by Informed Choice and submit a sample from every batch of product produced for banned substance testing.

NSF offers a standard certification as well as an NSF Certified for Sport certification. For standard NSF certification, a dietary supplement is tested by NSF to verify it contains exactly what is listed on the label, does not pose a health or environmental risk, and does not contain common contaminants (such as bacteria or undeclared ingredients). NSF Certified for Sport goes several steps further and includes testing for more than 270 banned substances identified by WADA, manufacturing facility auditing, and ongoing product monitoring (**Table 10-3**).

**TABLE 10-3 Quality and Banned Substance Testing**

| Certifying Body | Tests for Quality | Tests for Banned Substances |
|---|---|---|
| Informed Choice | X | X |
| NSF | X |  |
| NSF for Sport | X | X |
| USP | X |  |
| BSCG | X | X |

United States Pharmacopeia (USP) is an organization with a verification program that evaluates the quality of dietary supplements. As part of the Verification program, USP conducts facility audits of current good manufacturing processes, a quality control and manufacturing process evaluation, and product testing, including random testing. The Banned Substance Control Group (BSCG) offers both a drug-free and a quality certification. The BSCG quality certification is comparable to the other offerings, testing for contaminants, conducting manufacturing site audits, and performing random testing to ensure supplements contain the ingredients listed. The drug-free certification tests for WADA, the National College Athletic Association (NCAA), and other major sports leagues’ banned substances as well as other pharmaceutical agents. **Table 10-4** provides a list of third-party supplement testing companies.

**TABLE 10-4 Third-Party Supplement Testing Companies**

| U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) | Banned Substances Control Group | Informed Choice | NSF International |
|---|---|---|---|