---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Health Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Absorption is tightly regulated, and the body is good at absorbing more iron when it is needed and absorbing less when it needs less. Most of the body’s iron is found in oxygen-carrying hemoglobin on red blood cells.

Vegetarians and vegans are more likely to have insufficient iron intake and have increased risk for anemia (Pawlak et al., 2018), but these risks can be mitigated by either supplementing with iron or consuming iron-rich foods, such as beans, lentils, tofu, and certain nuts and seeds. Furthermore, premenopausal women have increased iron needs, particularly during pregnancy and lactation. Athletes also have greater iron needs, as impact—including such as when the foot strikes the ground (foot strike hemolysis)—can disrupt the red blood cell’s integrity and cause iron loss during red blood cell turnover. Men are less likely to experience iron insufficiency due to reduced relative needs and greater red meat consumption. Nonetheless, iron deficiency is one of the more common nutrient deficiencies in developed countries—10–20% of women have iron deficiency anemia compared to 2% of men (Killip et al., 2007).

Iron toxicity is rare, because excess iron mostly goes unabsorbed. Large amounts of ingested iron can cause gastric distress, particularly when taken on an empty stomach. In extremely large doses, iron can cause serious organ failure, coma, and death. Iron supplementation in those with **hemochromatosis** is also potentially fatal. An emerging area of research is focusing on iron-induced increases in free radicals and oxidative stress as a potential cause of the correlation between red meat intake and disease (Czerwonka & Tokarz, 2017).

Iodine is used to form thyroid hormones. Iodine has been added to salt since 1924 to prevent iodine deficiency and the resulting enlarged thyroids (goiters). This is a manner of iodine supplementation, as food sources that do not come from the sea are relatively poor sources of iodine (except for dairy and eggs). Iodine is mostly found in nature in the same form as it is present in iodized salt: potassium iodine or sodium iodide. Kelp, for example, is a seaweed with high concentrations of iodine.

Iodine deficiency is uncommon in the United States and most developed countries, but it is still present in landlocked regions with iodine-deficient soil—areas containing about 2.2 billion people (Peterson, 2000). Iodine deficiency is considered the most common cause of preventable serious cognitive disability. It may reduce cognitive ability and increase the risk for attention deficit disorder. For these reasons, women who are pregnant or nursing are an important demographic to consider iodine intake.

Excess iodine intake can still cause goiter and hypothyroidism (an underactive thyroid gland), but it is not known to cause cognitive disability. Iodine taken in doses near 100 times the upper limit can cause toxicity with symptoms of nausea, vomiting, fever, weak pulse, and coma (Institute of Medicine, 2001).

Zinc catalyzes many varied reactions. Zinc deficiency symptoms include slow growth, loss of appetite, hair loss, compromised immune function, and reproductive disorders. Zinc deficiency is rare, but those who are vegetarian or vegan and women who are pregnant are more likely to have insufficient zinc intake. Excess zinc consumption has mild side effects of gastric upset and headaches. Chronically, zinc toxicity can reduce immune function, cause poor blood lipid profiles, and disrupt the absorption of other minerals (Institute of Medicine, 2001).

Chromium is involved in macronutrient metabolism, and it may influence glucose tolerance, thus it has become a popular dietary supplement. Chromium supplementation, however, has only been able to help reduce blood glucose levels in those with poor chromium status and/or poor glucose control. It is likely ineffective in healthy persons with adequate chromium intake. Poor glucose tolerance is the only known symptom of chromium deficiency, and toxicity is not likely (National Academy of Medicine, 2001).

## Key Terms

**Hemochromatosis**
A disease in which the body absorbs too much iron from consumed foods.