---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Muscular System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### ACTION POTENTIAL

The **action potential** is a nerve impulse that is relayed from the central nervous system, through the peripheral nervous system, and into the muscle across the neuromuscular junction. As mentioned in the prior section, the electrolytes sodium and potassium help relay the impulse down the nerves to the neuromuscular junction.

**Figure 5-41Synapse between neuron and muscle

When that action potential reaches the junction, **neurotransmitters**, which are chemical messengers that cross the synapse between neuron and muscle, are released into the gap (**Figure 5-41**) (Raiteri et al., 2002).

Essentially, neurotransmitters represent the translation of the nervous system’s electrical message into a form the muscle cells can understand and act on. Once neurotransmitters are released, they bind with receptor sites on the muscle fiber specifically designed for their attachment. **Acetylcholine (ACh)** is a neurotransmitter used by the neuromuscular system. Once acetylcholine is released in the gap, it helps the action potential cross the synapse into the muscle, which initiates the steps in a muscle contraction (Mori, 2014).

## Key Terms

**Action potential**
Nerve impulse that is relayed from the central nervous system, through the peripheral nervous system, and into the muscle across the neuromuscular junction.

**Neurotransmitters**
Chemical messengers that cross the synapse between neuron and muscle and assist with nerve transmission.

**Acetylcholine (ACh)**
A neurotransmitter that helps the action potential cross the synapse into the muscle, which initiates the steps in a muscle contraction.

## Images

**Figure 5-41: Synapse between neuron and muscle**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF41.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533