---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY 

This chapter provides a brief discussion on the human movement system as it relates to the fitness professional. A working knowledge of the nervous, muscular, and skeletal systems is foundational for accurate client assessment and safe exercise programming. Clients may also have related questions regarding the three systems that the fitness professional must be able to answer. Fitness professionals are encouraged to continue studying these topics beyond this chapter to further develop their understanding.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

The human movement system includes all interactions of the nervous, muscular, and skeletal systems. The nervous system contains the CNS and the PNS. Sensory information is sent to the CNS by the PNS. The CNS then processes that information and relays it back through the PNS down to the muscles and organs. This pathway allows humans to interact with their environment. All three systems require water and specific electrolytes for proper function. The human movement system further develops as humans age from childhood to adulthood.

The skeletal system provides support for the human body and an attachment site for muscles. There are two divisions of the skeletal system: axial and appendicular. The skeletal system includes joints, which are the union of two bones. There are many types of bones and joints in the body.

The muscular system also contains different muscle types that support the skeletal system and produce movement. Muscles are further classified as type I (low force, slow to fatigue) and type II (high force, fast to fatigue) fibers that help the body with both endurance activities and movements that require high force production.

### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 5 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 5 Audio Review

**00:0014:55**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

Nervous System

	- The human movement system includes an integration of the nervous, skeletal, and muscular systems.

	- The nervous system provides sensory (afferent) and motor (efferent) information.

	- The neuron is the functional unit of the nervous system.

	- The nervous system includes the CNS (brain and spinal cord) and PNS (somatic and autonomic nervous system).

	- The PNS contains different types of sensory receptors such as mechanoreceptors, nociceptors, chemoreceptors, and photoreceptors.

	- The muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ are two important sensory receptors (mechanoreceptors).