---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Joints
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### CLASSIFICATIONS OF JOINTS

**Synovial joints** are the most common joints associated with human movement. They comprise approximately 80% of all the joints in the body and have the greatest capacity for motion. Synovial joints all have a synovial capsule (a collagenous structure surrounding the entire joint), a synovial membrane (the inner layer of the capsule), and cartilage that pads the ends of the articulating bones (Tamer, 2013).

Synovial joints also have another unique quality in that they produce synovial fluid. Synovial fluid resembles egg whites and works much like engine oil. It is secreted within the joint capsule from the synovial membrane and is essential for lubricating the joint surfaces to reduce excessive wear and to provide nutrition to the joint structures within the synovial capsule (Hui et al, 2012).

There are several classifications of synovial joints in the body. They include gliding, condyloid, hinge, saddle, pivot, and ball-and-socket joints.

A gliding joint, also known as a plane joint, is a **nonaxial** joint that has the simplest movement of all joints. It moves either back and forth or side to side. One example includes the joints between the carpal bones of the wrist (**Figure 5-27**) (Hamill et al., 2015).

Condyloid joints are termed so because the condyle of one bone fits into the elliptical cavity of another bone to form the joint (Hamill et al., 2015). Due to the shape, movement predominantly occurs in one direction with minimal movement in others. An example of condyloid joints is seen in the joints of the fingers (metacarpophalangeal) (**Figure 5-28**) (Floyd, 2018).

## Key Terms

**Synovial joints**
A joint with a fluid-filled joint capsule.

**Nonaxial**
A gliding joint that moves in only one plane, either back and forth or side to side.

## Images

**Figure 5-27: Gliding joint example—carpals of the wrist**
Alt: Condyloid joint in the fingers.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF27.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-28: Condyloid joint example—finger joints**
Alt: Condyloid joint in the fingers.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF28.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533