---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Joints
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
**Nonsynovial joints** are named as such because they have no joint capsule, fibrous connective tissue, or cartilage in the uniting structure. These joints exhibit little to no movement. An example of this joint includes sutures of the skull (**Figure 5-33**) (Hamill et al., 2015).

### FUNCTION OF JOINTS

Joints serve numerous functional requirements of the musculoskeletal system. One of the most important functions joints serve is that they allow for motion and movement. Joints also provide stability, allowing for motion to take place without unwanted movement (Lee et al., 2017). All segments in the human body are linked together, which implies that movement of one joint directly affects the motion of others (Sueki et al., 2013). This is an essential concept for fitness professionals to understand because it creates an awareness of how the body functionally operates and is the foundational premise behind the concept of the kinetic chain (Karandikar & Vargas, 2011).

### JOINT CONNECTIVE TISSUE

The joints of the body have several different connective tissues that support the bone articulations of the joint. There are different tissues around a joint, such as tendons, that connect muscle to bone and ligaments that connect the articulating bones of a joint. Of particular interest to the fitness professional is the anatomy and function of ligaments in relation to musculoskeletal functioning.

## Key Terms

**Nonsynovial joints**
Joints that have no joint capsule, fibrous connective tissue, or cartilage in the uniting structure.

## Images

**Figure 5-33: Nonsynovial joint example—sutures of the skull**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF33.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533