---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Skeletal System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
##### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Strength training in children and adolescents has long been a controversial topic among parents. One myth is that strength training can lead to growth or epiphyseal plate damage. Currently, there is no evidence that a well-designed, age-appropriate, strength-training program leads to such an injury. The existing case reports on these injuries are primarily attributed to the misuse of equipment, inappropriate weight, improper technique, or lack of qualified adult supervision (Dahab & McCambridge, 2009). In fact, many medical- and fitness-governing bodies have published position statements supporting resistance training for children and adolescents (Behm et al., 2008; Bergeron et al., 2015; Faigenbaum et al., 2009; Lloyd et al., 2014; McCambridge & Stricker, 2008).

LightField Studios/Shutterstock.com

#### SHORT BONES

Short bones are similar in length and width and appear somewhat cubical in shape. They consist predominantly of spongy bone tissue to maximize shock absorption. The carpals of the wrists (**Figure 5-11**) and tarsals of the ankles fit this category of bone.

#### FLAT BONES

Flat bones are thin bones comprising two layers of compact bone tissue surrounding a layer of spongy bone tissue (Florencio-Silva et al., 2015). These bones protect internal structures and provide broad attachment sites for muscles. The flat bones include the sternum (breastbone), scapulae (shoulder blades) (**Figure 5-12**), ribs, ilium (pelvis), and cranial (skull) bones (Hamill et al., 2015).

## Images

**Figure 5-11: ) and tarsals of the ankles fit this category of bone.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_UNNUN05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-11: Short bone example—carpals of the wrist**
Alt: Flat bone
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF11.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-12: Flat bone example—scapula**
Alt: Flat bone
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF12.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533