---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Muscular System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
It is important to note that all muscles have varying combinations of both type I and II fibers. Concentrations of each will vary depending on the function of the muscle and genetics. For example, within the calf complex, it has been shown that the soleus muscle is mostly made up of type I muscle fibers, whereas the gastrocnemius has a majority of type II fibers (Balius et al., 2013; Edgerton et al., 1975).

### GETTING TECHNICAL

**Type IIa and IIx Muscle Fibers**

Type II muscle fibers are subdivided into type IIa and type IIx based on their chemical and mechanical properties. Type IIx muscle fibers have a lower oxidative capacity and fatigue very quickly. Type IIa muscle fibers have a higher oxidative capacity and fatigue more slowly than type IIx but still fatigue much faster than type I fibers (Kenney et al., 2020).

Because of this, type IIa fibers are commonly known as “intermediate fast-twitch fibers.” They can use both aerobic and anaerobic metabolism almost equally to create energy (metabolism is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8). Essentially, type IIa fibers represent the middle ground between “slow-twitch” type I fibers and “fast-twitch” type IIx fibers (Wilson et al., 2012).

## Muscular System Life Course

From childhood to adolescence to adulthood, the muscular system continues to develop and grow, with peak mass, power, and strength occurring between 20 and 30 years of age (Keller & Engelhardt, 2014). Changes in muscle mass, power, and strength are small from ages 30 to 50 years. However, after age 50 years, muscle mass is lost by an average of 1–2% per year and strength is lost by about 1.5–5% per year (Keller & Engelhardt, 2014). Resistance training can be highly beneficial for combating the loss of muscle mass, power, and strength for aging adults (Fragala et al., 2019).

Loading...

## Images

Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_muscular_system_animation.jpeg