---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Skeletal System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### IRREGULAR BONES

Irregular bones are bones of unique shape and function that do not fit the characteristics of the other categories. These include the vertebrae (**Figure 5-13**), sacrum, coccyx (tailbone), and certain facial bones (Hamill et al., 2015).

#### SESAMOID BONES

Sesamoid bones are small bones embedded in a joint capsule or found in locations where a tendon passes over a joint. A common example is the patella (kneecap) (**Figure 5-14**). Sesamoid bones are also found in the hands and feet. Sesamoid bones develop within particular tendons at a site of considerable friction or tension (Hamill et al., 2015). They serve to improve leverage and protect the joint from damage.

### BONE MARKINGS

The majority of all bones have specific distinguishing structures known as surface markings. These structures are necessary for increasing the stability in joints as well as providing attachment sites for muscles. Bone markings can be divided into two simple categories: depressions and processes (Bandovic & Futterman, 2019).

#### DEPRESSIONS

**Depressions** are flattened or indented portions of the bone. A common depression is called a fossa. An example includes the infraspinous fossa located on the scapula (shoulder blade) (**Figure 5-15**). This is an attachment site for the infraspinatus muscle (Hamill et al., 2015).

Another form of depression is known as a sulcus. This is simply a groove in a bone that allows soft tissue (i.e., muscle, tendons, and ligaments) to pass through. An example of this is the intertubercular sulcus located between the greater and lesser tubercles of the humerus (upper arm bone) (**Figure 5-16**) (Bandovic & Futterman, 2019). This is commonly known as the groove for the biceps tendon.

## Key Terms

**Depressions**
Flattened or indented portions of bone.

## Images

**Figure 5-13: Irregular bone example—vertebrae**
Alt: Sesamoid bone, patella
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF13.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-14: Sesamoid bone example— patella**
Alt: Sesamoid bone, patella
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF14.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-15: Fossa example—infraspinous fossa of the scapula**
Alt: Example of a sulcus on the humerus bone.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF15.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-16: Sulcus example—intertubercular sulcus of the humerus**
Alt: Example of a sulcus on the humerus bone.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF16.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533