---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### HELPFUL HINT

The terms *human movement system* and *kinetic chain* are synonymous. The term kinetic chain refers to how muscles, bones and joints, and nerves are linked together (forming a chain) to create movement (kinetic). For example, during the squat, the hip, knee, ankle, and foot all move together to accomplish the motion. The fitness professional should recognize that movement at one joint can impact the motion of other joints within the kinetic chain. Similarly, a problem at one area of the body can have a “domino effect,” causing problems at other points as well. 

# Nervous System

The **nervous system** is a specialized network of nerves that transmits information within the human body. The nervous system has many functions, such as providing sensory information (e.g., pain, sight, taste) to our brain, stimulating human movement through muscle contractions, and keeping the heart and organs functioning. Essentially, the nervous system represents the wiring and operating software that run the human machine.

## Anatomy of the Nervous System

The nervous system is one of the main organ systems of the body and consists of a network of specialized cells called neurons that transmit and coordinate signals, providing a communication network within the human body (Karemaker, 2017). The **neuron** is a specialized cell and is often referred to as the functional unit of the nervous system (**Figure 5-1**). Billions of neurons make up the complex structure of the nervous system. These cells provide the nervous system with the ability to communicate with itself, as well as with the outside environment. Neurons process and transmit information through electrical and chemical signals. Neurons form the core of the nervous system, which includes the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves (Wehr-wein et al., 2016).

## Key Terms

**Nervous system**
A network of specialized cells called neurons that transmit and coordinate signals, providing a communication network within the human body.

**Neuron**
Specialized cell that is the functional unit of the nervous system.

## Images

**Figure 5-1: ). Billions of neurons make up the complex structure of the nervous system. These cells provide the nervous system with the ability to communicate with itself, as well as with the outside environment. Neurons process and transmit information through electrical and chemical signals. Neurons form the core of the nervous system, which includes the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves (Wehr-wein et al., 2016).**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_UNNUN01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-1: The neuron**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533