---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Physical Activity and the Nervous System

The nervous system helps individuals successfully perform **motor skills** (i.e., movement) through the coordinated effort of the sensory and motor subsystems. To perform physical activity, motor skills must be acquired.

For example, humans are not born with fully developed coordination (babies are not born walking), and physical abilities must be developed over time. In most cases, motor skills, such as lifting weights or riding a bike, are learned and acquired through repetitive practice.

The nervous system plays a major role on how humans learn and retain new skills. The mechanisms behind motor-skill learning are related to brain development through neuroplasticity and neurocircuitry (Hötting & Röder, 2013). The development of motor skills is best under-stood as a three-stage process (Taylor & Ivry, 2012):

	- Stage 1 (cognitive): The client is just learning a skill. They understand the goals of the skill and develop movement strategies and can perform the skill but with inconsistent performance.

	- Stage 2 (associative): The client begins to understand the skill. Through practice, they refine the skill and movement strategy and can perform the skill with less error.

	- Stage 3 (autonomous): The client has mastered the skill. They perform the skill consistently with no error and independently modify the skill without error.

### TRAINING TIP

The three stages of motor skill development may provide the fitness professional with a road map for teaching clients new movements or exercises.

	- During stage 1 (cognitive), you may need to use simple instructions and break down the skill into smaller steps so your clients will be able to understand the goals of the movement.

	- During stage 2 (associative), you may need to help refine your clients’ skills through practice and regular feedback.

	- During stage 3 (autonomous), you may be able to teach your clients new versions of the skill to further challenge them.

Loading...

## Key Terms

**Motor skills**
Specific movements through the coordinated effort of the sensory and motor subsystems.

## Images

Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_animation_nervous_system.jpeg