---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# TRY THIS

Next time you stretch, think about what is happening in the muscle. As a stretch reaches its end limit, the feelings of tension and discomfort that tell you “don’t stretch any farther” represent the stretch reflex working to protect the muscle from lengthening too far or too fast.

**Golgi tendon organs** are specialized sensory receptors located at the point where skeletal muscle fibers insert into the tendons of skeletal muscle. They are sensitive to changes in muscular tension and rate of that tension change (**Figure 5-7**) (Lyle & Nichols, 2019). Activation of Golgi tendon organs will cause the muscle to relax, which prevents the muscle from excessive stress and possible injury (Chalmers, 2002). The functions of both the muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs are highly important in relation to flexibility training.

**Joint receptors** are located in and around the joint capsule, and they respond to pressure, acceleration, and deceleration of the joint (**Figure 5-8**). These receptors act to signal extreme joint positions and help to prevent injury. They can also act to initiate a reflexive (automatic) inhibitory response in the surrounding muscles if there is too much stress placed on that joint (Dean et al., 2013).

## Key Terms

**Golgi tendon organ (GTO)**
A specialized sensory receptor located at the point where skeletal muscle fibers insert into the tendons of skeletal muscle; sensitive to changes in muscular tension and rate of tension change.

**Joint receptors**
Receptors located in and around the joint capsule that respond to pressure, acceleration, and deceleration of the joint.

## Images

**Figure 5-7: Golgi tendon organ**
Alt: Joint receptors
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-8: Joint receptors**
Alt: Joint receptors
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533