---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### VEINS

Vessels that collect blood from the capillaries are called venules (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). Capillaries merge to form venules, which progressively merge to form the larger veins. Veins then transport all of the blood from the body back to the heart (Fox, 2006; Vander et al., 2003; Tortora, 2008). The walls of the veins are capable of holding large amounts of blood, and blood flow through the veins is assisted either by the contraction of skeletal muscle or by the contraction of smooth muscle along the veins (Reid et al., 2014). As blood passes from the extremity veins toward the heart, special valves prevent a backflow of blood (Goodman, 2015).

##### HELPFUL HINT

Arteries (large vessels) and arterioles (medium vessels) carry oxygenated blood away from the heart to the rest of the body. The exception is the pulmonary arteries, which carry deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs.

Veins (large vessels) and venules (medium vessels) carry deoxygenated blood back to the heart from the body. The exception is the pulmonary veins, which carry oxygenated blood from the lungs to the heart.

Capillaries (the smallest vessels) are the sites of nutrient, gas, and waste exchange in bodily tissues, connecting arterioles and venules.

During exercise, blood increasingly returns to the heart from the veins, which in turn leads to increased ventricular filling. The advantage of this lies in the Frank Starling Law of the Heart, which states that stroke volume increases when there is increased venous return and ventricular filling. The premise is that increased ventricular filling improves contractile force as a result of a greater stretch of the muscle fibers of the heart (Reid et al., 2014).

##### CRITICAL

**Venous pooling** is a term used to describe the accumulation of blood into the extremities due to slow blood flow through the veins (venous return) or backflow (Goodman, 2015; Reid et al., 2014). When venous return is reduced as a result of damage to the veins, such as the one-way valves not working, swelling in the extremities may accumulate and the veins of the leg become more visible (Goodman, 2015). In addition, reduced venous return reduces cardiac output and can produce a feeling of being light-headed (Reid et al., 2014). Clients experiencing venous pooling may be more likely to feel light-headed when rising from a lying to standing position too quickly (Goodman, 2015).

#### BLOOD PRESSURE

**Blood pressure (BP)** is the measurement of pressure of circulating blood against the walls of arteries. Blood pressure measurement results are based on a person’s cardiac output and **peripheral resistance**. Peripheral resistance would be increased if the arteries were constricted and decreased if the arteries were dilated (opened). When listening to blood pressure, the systolic pressure reflects the pressure in the arteries when the heart contracts, whereas diastolic pressure reflects the arterial pressure during relaxation of the heart, when the heart fills with blood between beats.

## Key Terms

**Venous pooling**
The accumulation of blood into the extremities due to slow blood flow though the veins (venous return) or backflow.

**Blood pressure (BP)**
The outward pressure exerted by the blood on the vessel walls; reported as systolic/ diastolic.

**Peripheral resistance**
The amount of resistance in the arteries that must be overcome for blood to flow.