---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Respiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Inspiratory ventilation occurs in two forms: normal resting state (quiet) breathing and heavy (deep, forced) breathing. Normal breathing requires the use of the primary respiratory muscles (diaphragm, external intercostals), whereas heavy breathing requires the additional use of the secondary respiratory muscles, such as the scalenes, sternocleidomastoid, and pectoralis minor (Brown, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). A normal respiratory rate at rest is 12 to 16 breaths per minute (Reid et al., 2014).

Expiratory ventilation can be both active and passive. During normal breathing, expiratory ventilation is passive because it results from the relaxation of the contracting inspiratory muscles. During heavy or forced breathing, expiratory ventilation relies on the activity of expiratory muscles to compress the thoracic cavity and force out air (Brown, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). **Figure 6-9** demonstrates the process of inspiration and expiration.

**Figure 6-9Inspiration and expiration

Breathing also helps regulate blood flow back to the heart. The respiratory pump acts as a mechanism that helps pump blood back to the heart during inspiration; intrathoracic pressure decreases during inspiration, causing a drop in pressure in the right atrium of the heart, and helps improve the circulation of blood back to the heart. Holding in breath during exercise while contracting the abdominals, also known as the **Valsalva maneuver**, increases the rigidity of the spine to make it easier to support heavy loads. However, an undesirable effect is that a compressive force is exerted on the heart; this makes it more difficult for blood to return to the heart (Hackett & Chow, 2013), making it important to breathe through exercises, especially during resistance training.

# CRITICAL

The Valsalva maneuver will temporarily increase blood pressure. This technique should be minimized when training a client diagnosed with high blood pressure (hypertension).

## Key Terms

**Valsalva maneuver**
A process that involves expiring against a closed windpipe, creating additional intra-abdominal pressure and spinal stability.

## Images

**Figure 6-9: Inspiration and expiration**
Alt: Inspiration and exhalation
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF09.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533