---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Respiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### RESPIRATORY AIRWAY

The purpose of ventilation is to move air in and out of the body. The respiratory passages are divided into two categories: the conducting airways and the respiratory airways. The conducting airways consist of all the structures through which air travels before entering the respiratory airways (**Table 6-4**). The nasal and oral cavities, mouth, pharynx, larynx, trachea, and bronchioles provide a gathering station for air and oxygen to be directed into the body (**Figure 6-10**). These structures also allow the incoming air to be purified, humidified (i.e., moisture added), and warmed or cooled to match body temperature (Brooks, 2000; Brown, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Swain, 2014; Vander et al., 2003).

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

Exercising in cool and dry climates would make breathing difficult if a client has asthma. Asthma is a respiratory condition that causes temporary shortness of breath, coughing, and a wheezing sound while attempting to breath (Reid et al., 2014). Clients with asthma should always carry along their emergency inhaler if they will be performing physical activity, especially during moderate-to-intense exercise.

**TABLE 6-4 Structures of the Respiratory Passages**

| Conducting Airways | Nasal cavity |
|---|---|
| Oral cavity |
| Pharynx |
| Larynx |
| Trachea |
| Right and left pulmonary bronchi |
| Bronchioles |
| Respiratory Airways | Alveoli |
| Alveolar sacs |

The respiratory airways collect the channeled air coming from the conducting airways. At the end of the bronchioles sit the alveoli, which are made up of clusters of alveolar sacs. It is here, in the alveolar sacs, that gases such as O2 and CO2 are transported in and out of the bloodstream through a process known as **diffusion**. This is how oxygen gets from the outside environment to the tissues of the body (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003).

## Key Terms

**Diffusion**
The process of getting oxygen from the environment to the tissues of the body.

## Images

**Figure 6-10: The respiratory passages**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF10.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533