---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# The Cardiorespiratory System

The **cardiorespiratory system** represents the functional combination of two closely related systems (**Figure 6-1**):

	- The cardiovascular system (i.e., the heart, blood vessels, and blood)

	- The respiratory system (i.e., the airways and the lungs)

These systems work together to provide the body with adequate oxygen (O2), deliver nutrients, and remove waste products, such as carbon dioxide (CO2), from cells in the body (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Reid et al., 2014; Vander et al., 2003). Efficient functioning of the cardiorespiratory system is essential for virtually every component of health and fitness, especially as it relates to exercise and athletic performance. Therefore, fitness professionals require a foundational understanding of this vital component of the body and how it works.

# The Cardiovascular System

The **cardiovascular system** is composed of the heart, blood, and blood vessels that transport blood to and from the heart and tissues of the body (**Figure 6-2**). This is one of many systems that regulate the human body and all of its necessary survival functions.

## The Heart

The heart is a muscular pump that rhythmically contracts to push blood throughout the body. It is positioned obliquely in the center of the **thoracic cavity**, lying anteriorly (in front) to the spine and posteriorly (behind) and slightly to the left of the sternum (breastbone) (Reid et al., 2014).

## Key Terms

**Cardiorespiratory system**
A system of the body composed of the heart, blood, blood vessels, lungs, and airways.

**Cardiovascular system**
A system of the body, also known as the circulatory system, that transports blood to tissues of the body.

**Thoracic cavity**
Chamber within the chest that contains the heart and lungs.

## Images

**Figure 6-1: The cardiorespiratory system**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 6-2: The cardiovascular system**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533