---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

When the heart’s conduction system is not working properly, an electrical device called a pacemaker is surgically implanted into the chest under the skin. The pacemaker is smaller than the size of a fist and has one or more wires that control the heart’s conduction system based on the individual’s needs (Goodman & Fuller, 2015).

### FUNCTION OF THE HEART

The amount of blood pumped out of the heart with each contraction is referred to as **stroke volume**. The stroke volume is the difference between the ventricular** end-diastolic volume** and the **end-systolic volume**. The end-diastolic volume is the filled volume of blood in the ventricle before contraction, and the end-systolic volume is the residual volume of blood remaining in the ventricle after ejection. In a typical heart, the end-diastolic volume is about 120 mL of blood, and the end-systolic volume is about 50 mL of blood. The difference in these two volumes, 70 mL, represents the stroke volume (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Vander et al., 2003).

The rate with which the heart beats is referred to as the **heart rate (HR)**. Recall, an average resting heart rate for an untrained adult is approximately 60 to 100 beats per minute (BPM) (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Vander et al., 2003). Levels below 60 BPM are referred to as **bradycardia** and levels over 100 BPM are referred to as **tachycardia** (Reid et al., 2014). **Cardiac output (Q)** is the volume of blood pumped by the heart per minute (mL blood/min). Cardiac output is a function of heart rate and stroke volume. While cardiac output at rest is about 5 L/min, it may increase to as high as 30 L/min during vigorous exercise (Reid et al., 2014).

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

If an average person has a resting heart rate of 70 BPM and a resting stroke volume of 70 mL/beat, cardiac output at rest would be 70 BPM × 70 mL/beat = 4,900 mL/min (or 4.9 L/min).

## Key Terms

**Stroke volume**
The amount of blood pumped out of the heart with each contraction.

**End-diastolic volume**
The filled volume of the ventricle before contraction.

**End-systolic volume**
The volume of blood remaining in the ventricle after ejection.

**Heart rate (HR)**
The measurement of the number of times a heart beats within a specified time period (usually 1 minute).

**Bradycardia**
When the heart rate is less than 60 beats per minute.

**Tachycardia**
When the heart rate is greater than 100 beats per minute.

**Cardiac output (Q)**
The overall performance of the heart (heart rate × stroke volume).