---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Respiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The carbon dioxide is then released through exhalation (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). In a simplistic overview, oxygen and carbon dioxide trade places in the tissues of the body, blood, and lungs; as one is coming in, the other is going out.

illustrissima/Shutterstock.com

### OXYGEN CONSUMPTION

The capacity to efficiently use oxygen is dependent on the respiratory system’s ability to collect oxygen, the cardiovascular system’s ability to absorb and transport it to the tissues of the body, and the tissues’ and cells’ ability to use the oxygen (Franklin, 2000). The use of oxygen by the body is known as oxygen uptake (i.e., oxygen consumption).

Certain metabolic processes require the presence of oxygen to supply the body with energy while others do not. This is an essential concept to keep in mind for weight loss clients, because fat cannot be burned (i.e., used for energy) without the presence of oxygen. As a carbon-based life form, the only way mass can be physically removed from the human body—aside from surgical procedures—is through the carbon dioxide that is exhaled with every breath.

### ABNORMAL BREATHING PATTERNS

A respiratory rate for an average-sized adult greater than 24 breaths per minute is considered too high (**tachypnea**), whereas a rate of less than 8 breaths per minute is considered too slow (**bradypnea**) (Goodman, 2015; Reid et al., 2014). Any difficulty or changes to normal breathing patterns can affect the normal response to exercise (Timmons, 1994). In cases where there is an alteration of the normal biomechanical breathing function, respiration is often shallow, with compensation from the secondary respiratory muscles (e.g., scalenes and sternocleidomastoid) more predominant than the diaphragm (Vidotto et al., 2019). A rapid, shallow, upper-chest breathing pattern may occur and lead to dizziness, **dyspnea**, and hyperventilation (Vidotto et al., 2019).

#### TRAINING TIP

During a training session, clients who are overusing secondary respiratory muscles will have visible contractions of the sternocleidomastoid, scalenes, and upper trapezius muscles (Reid et al., 2014).

The respiratory muscles also play a major postural role in the human body, all connecting directly to the cervical spine (neck vertebrae), shoulders, and cranial portions of the body. Increased activity and excessive tension of these muscles may result in headaches, lightheadedness, and dizziness. Excessive breathing (short, shallow breaths) can lead to altered carbon dioxide and oxygen blood content and to feelings of anxiety that further initiate an excessive breathing response.

Inadequate joint motion of the spine and rib cage, as a result of improper breathing, causes joints to become restricted and stiff (Mendes et al., 2019; Reid et al., 2014). Restricted movements of the spine and rib cage or a slouched spinal posture (e.g., kyphosis), which may increase with age, further limits the capacity of the respiratory system and should not be overlooked as a cause or contribution to abnormal breathing (Mendes et al., 2019; Reid et al., 2014).

## Key Terms

**Tachypnea**
Respiratory rate that is too fast; greater than 24 breaths per minute.

**Bradypnea**
Respiratory rate that is too slow; fewer than 8 breaths per minute.

**Dyspnea**
Shortness of breath or labored breathing.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_UNNUN04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533