---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 6 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 6 Audio Review

**00:0014:01**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- The cardiorespiratory system is comprised of the heart, blood, blood vessels, and lungs.

	- The respiratory system is comprised of the respiratory airways, lungs, and respiratory muscles.

	- The heart is contained in an area referred to as the mediastinum.

	- A normal heart rate ranges from 60 to 100 beats per minute.

	- Each side of the heart has two chambers: an atrium and a ventricle.

	- The body will increase the heart rate in response to exercise and decrease the heart rate during sleep.

	- The electrical conduction system of the heart is responsible for its function and begins with the sinoatrial node, which is in the right atrium.

	- The sinoatrial node is referred to as the pacemaker of the heart and sends the electrical signal to the atrioventricular node and ultimately into the ventricles.

	- The right atrium gathers deoxygenated blood returning to the heart from the body and then sends it to the right ventricle and to the lungs for oxygenation.

	- The left atrium receives oxygenated blood from the lungs and sends it to the left ventricle to be pumped out into the body.

	- Special valves are present in the heart to ensure that blood is pumped in a one-way fashion.

	- The pulmonary artery transports deoxygenated blood from the right ventricles to the lungs, whereas the pulmonary vein transports oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left atrium.

	- As part of the normal integrated functioning of the cardiorespiratory system, the carbon dioxide from the deoxygenated blood pumped into the lungs from the right ventricle is ultimately expelled to the environment through normal expiration.

	- Stroke volume is the amount of blood pumped out of the heart with each contraction.

	- End-diastolic volume is the volume of blood in the ventricle prior to contraction, whereas the end-systolic volume is the amount of blood present in the ventricle after contraction.

	- Stroke volume is ultimately a product of end-diastolic volume minus end-systolic volume.

	- Cardiac output is the volume of blood pumped out of the heart in a minute and is a function of both heart rate and stroke volume.

	- Normal blood pressure is a systolic less than 120 mm Hg with a diastolic of less than 80 mm Hg.

	- Arteries transport blood away from the heart to the body, whereas veins transport blood back to the heart, and capillaries function as an exchange channel between the vessels and bodily tissues.

	- Breathing (ventilation) is divided into two phases, referred to as inspiration and expiration.

	- The respiratory system is tasked with bringing in oxygen, filtering air from inspiration, and subsequently oxygenating blood from the heart as well as exhaling carbon dioxide.

	- A normal respiratory rate is 12 to 16 breaths per minute and relies on the primary respiratory muscles (diaphragm and intercostals).

	- During normal inspiration, active contraction of respiratory muscles occurs, whereas relaxation occurs during expiration.

	- During forced or heavy breathing, expiratory ventilation relies on secondary muscles to compress the thoracic cavity and force air out.

	- *Diffusion* is a term used to describe the process of getting oxygen from the environment to the body’s tissues.