---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Respiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Cardiorespiratory System Function

An essential element to sustain life is oxygen. The respiratory system provides the means to gather oxygen from the environment and transfer it into our bodies. It is inhaled through the nose and mouth, channeled through the trachea, and then down through the bronchi, where it eventually reaches the lungs and alveolar sacs (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003).

Simultaneously, deoxygenated blood is pumped from the right ventricle to the lungs through the pulmonary arteries to tiny capillary vessels. Pulmonary capillaries surround the alveolar sacs, and as oxygen fills the sacs, it diffuses across the capillary membranes and into the blood (Tortora, 2008). The oxygenated blood then returns to the left atrium through the pulmonary veins, from which it is pumped into the left ventricle and out to the tissues of the body.

As the cells of the body use oxygen, they also produce carbon dioxide, which needs to be removed from the body. Carbon dioxide is transported from the tissues back to the heart, and eventually to the lungs, in the deoxygenated blood. In the alveolar sacs, carbon dioxide diffuses from the pulmonary capillaries into the alveoli (at the same time, oxygen diffuses into the blood).