---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Respiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Mechanisms of Breathing

Breathing (or ventilation) is the actual process of moving air in and out of the body; it requires optimal functioning of the **respiratory pump** and all its components (**Table 6-3**). Breathing is divided into two phases: **inspiration** (or inhalation) and **expiration** (exhalation). Inspiratory ventilation is active. This requires active contraction of inspiratory muscles to increase thoracic cavity volume, which decreases the intrapulmonary pressure (i.e., air pressure within the thoracic cavity).

**TABLE 6-3 Structures of the Respiratory Pump**

| Bones | Sternum (breastbone) |
|---|---|
| Ribs |
| Vertebrae (spine) |
| Inspiration Muscles | Diaphragm |
| External intercostals (muscles between individual ribs) |
| Scalenes (side of neck muscles) |
| Sternocleidomastoid (front of neck muscle) |
| Pectoralis minor (smaller chest muscle) |
| Expiration Muscles | Internal intercostals (muscles between individual ribs) |
| Abdominals |

When the intrapulmonary pressure decreases below that of the atmospheric pressure (the everyday pressure in the air), air is drawn into the lungs (Brooks, 2000; Brown, 2000; Fox, 2006; McArdle et al., 2016; Vander et al., 2003). Conversely, expiration is the process of actively or passively relaxing the inspiratory muscles to move air out of the body.

## Key Terms

**Respiratory pump**
Composed of skeletal structures (bones) and soft tissues (muscles) that work together to allow for proper respiratory mechanics as well as pumping blood back to the heart during inspiration.

**Inspiration**
The process of contracting the inspiratory muscles to move air into the body.

**Expiration**
The process of actively or passively relaxing the inspiratory muscles to move air out of the body.