---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: The Digestive System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
While most of the fluids in the GI tracts are absorbed by the small intestine, the large intestine plays a role in total fluid absorption (Pandol et al., 2015). Fluids in the intestinal tracts are collected not only from what a person drinks but also from fluids secreted into the GI tracts from salivary glands (glands that produce saliva), the stomach, pancreas, liver, and gallbladder. While the small intestine absorbs much of this, the large intestine absorbs its share, and remaining fluids are excreted with feces (Pandol et al., 2015).

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

A properly working digestive system requires adequate water consumption. Inadequate consumption may lead to an inability of food to pass through the lower GI tract and lead to constipation and discomfort.

After electrolytes, including water, have been absorbed from the large intestine, the waste material passes into the rectum and anal canal. Once in the rectum, internal pressure occurs, which relaxes the internal anal sphincter, and leads to an urge to defecate (Pandol et al., 2015). Once this occurs, the waste material passes into the anus. It is here that voluntary contraction of the rectal muscles, aided by the abdominals and other pelvic musculature, push the waste product out of the anus in a process called defecation (Pandol et al., 2015).

## Effects of Exercise on the Gastrointestinal System

Evidence suggests that physical activity can improve intestinal motility and help with constipation (Goodman & Fuller, 2015; Kim et al., 2014; Song et al., 2012, 2018). The basis for this effect is that peristalsis of the intestines is activated by physical activity. The time it takes for food to pass from the stomach to the rectum is often referred to as transit time, and studies have evaluated the effects of exercise and physical activity on colon transit time. Physical activity is a broad term; however, evidence from one particular study suggests that individuals classified as having higher physical activity levels have improved colon transit time (e.g., reduced time) when compared to individuals classified as having lower physical activity levels (Song et al., 2012).

With regard to exercise, evidence suggests that both aerobic and resistance training improve colon transit time (Kim et al., 2014; Song et al., 2018). In one study, after individuals performed 60 minutes of combined resistance training and running three times per week for 12 weeks, their colon transit time improved compared with transit time prior to the study (Song et al., 2018). In another study, a 12-week aerobic exercise program was performed; while transit time improved, the results were not as good as prior studies using combined aerobic and resistance training (Kim et al., 2014; Song et al., 2018). In summary, physical activity has been shown to improve peristalsis, which offers a favorable benefit regarding the time it takes food to pass through the gastrointestinal system. While evidence exists showing that higher physical activity offers a greater benefit, a combined program of aerobic and resistance training may be most beneficial.

Loading...

## Images

Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_digestive_system_animation.jpeg