---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Blood Vessels

**Blood vessels** form a closed circuit of hollow tubes that allows blood to be transported to and from the heart (**Figure 6-7**). There are three major types of blood vessels: **arteries**, which carry the blood away from the heart; **capillaries**, which are the exchange sites of water and chemicals between the blood and the tissues; and **veins**, which carry blood back to the heart (Fox, 2006; Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003).

### ARTERIES

The largest artery in the body is the aorta, which carries blood away from the heart (Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008). The branches of the aorta include medium-sized arteries: the carotid artery (supplies blood to the brain via the neck), the subclavian artery (supplies blood to both arms), the mesenteric arteries (supply blood to the digestive system), the renal artery (supplies blood to both kidneys), and the iliac artery (supplies blood to pelvic and reproductive organs) (Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003).

**Figure 6-7Blood vessels

These medium-sized arteries further divide into smaller arteries that are called **arterioles** and eventually into microscopic vessels known as capillaries (Fox, 2006; Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003).

### CAPILLARIES

Capillaries are the smallest blood vessels in the body. They serve as a connection point where arterioles transition to **venules** and as the sites of element exchange between the blood and the body tissues (Fox, 2006; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). Some substances, such as water, can both enter and exit the capillaries. Other substances can only enter the capillaries from body tissues, such as carbon dioxide, and some can only exit the capillaries into body tissues, such as glucose and oxygen. The term **vasculogenesis** is used to describe the formation of new capillaries, whereas the term **angiogenesis** is used to describe the formation of new capillaries from existing vessels. Growth factors from the platelets assist with both angiogenesis and vasculogenesis (Kolber et al., 2018).

## Key Terms

**Blood vessels**
Network of hollow tubes that circulates blood throughout the body.

**Arteries**
Arteries carry blood away from the heart and to the lungs.

**Capillaries**
The smallest blood vessels and the site of exchange of elements between the blood and the tissues.

**Veins**
Vessels that carry deoxygenated blood back to the heart and then to the lungs.

**Arterioles**
Small arteries that eventually divide into capillaries.

**Venules**
Small veins that allows blood to drain from capillaries into the larger veins.

**Vasculogenesis**
The formation of new capillaries.

**Angiogenesis**
The formation of new capillaries from existing blood vessels.

## Images

**Figure 6-7: Blood vessels**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%209781284200881_CH06_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533