---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
- Abnormal breathing patterns will affect exercise performance and may be identified by shallow breaths, which often are associated with the use of secondary respiratory muscles (sternocleidomastoid, upper trapezius, or scalenes).

	- A respiratory rate of less than 8 breaths per minute would be considered too slow (bradypnea), whereas a rate of greater than 24 breaths per minute is considered too high (tachypnea).

	- The endocrine system is comprised of glands that secrete hormones.

	- When hormones are released into the bloodstream, they are protected by transporters, which carry them to the intended organ or structure, where they bind with a receptor to stimulate a particular function.

	- The hypothalamus and pituitary gland control a majority of functions for the endocrine system.

	- Cortisol, which is stimulated by the adrenal cortex, may be used to aid in recovery from exercise and as a marker of overtraining.

	- Insulin and glucagon both function to control blood glucose levels and work opposite to each other; glucagon aids in the metabolism of glucose, and insulin aids in the cellular uptake and storage of glucose.

	- The catecholamines, which consist of epinephrine and norepinephrine, are immediately stimulated from the adrenal medulla in response to exercise.

	- Cortisol, considered a catabolic hormone, is produced by the adrenal cortex and is sensitive to blood sugar and sleep.

	- Although testosterone levels decline with age, they can be stimulated through intense exercise.

	- Growth hormones are responsible for growth and development as well as lipolysis and are produced from the pituitary gland.

	- One of the most potent of the anabolic hormones is insulin-like growth factor, which is produced by the liver in response to growth hormones binding on liver receptors.

	- Testosterone, growth hormones, and insulin-like growth factors are stimulated in response to anaerobic resistance training as well as vigorous aerobic activity (e.g., high-intensity training styles).

	- Thyroid hormones serve numerous functions in the body, including metabolism and increasing bone mineral density through the secretion of calcitonin.

	- Adequate sleep is a necessary requirement for glucose metabolism, hormone function, and muscle recovery.

	- The digestive system consists of the oral cavity (head and mouth), the upper GI system (stomach, small intestine [duodenum, jejunum, and ileum]), and the lower GI tract (large intestine, rectum, and anus), as well as the liver, gall bladder, and pancreas.

	- Ingested foods and liquids are first processed in the oral cavity where mastication (the mechanical process of chewing and breaking down food) begins the digestive process.

	- Once food is broken down, it passes through the esophagus into the stomach where gastric juices aid in digestion, kill bacteria, and turn food into chyme, which is then passed into the small intestine.

	- The small intestine has a key function of absorption of carbohydrates, lipids, calcium, amino acids, and iron. Additionally, electrolytes, including water, are absorbed into the small intestines.

	- The large intestine absorbs electrolytes and vitamins, and serves to pass waste from nondigested food into the rectum.

	- While fluids are absorbed into both the small and large intestine, the large intestine uses water to help pass waste into the rectum.

	- The liver, gall bladder, and pancreas produce and store digestive juices, which are secreted into the small intestine to help with digestion.

	- Evidence suggests that exercise can improve digestion speed by increasing the transit time of food from the upper to the lower GI tracts.