---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

The human body is composed of numerous systems and subsystems that work collectively to support normal physiological functioning. These include the cardiorespiratory, endocrine, and digestive systems. The cardiorespiratory system is comprised of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. The cardiovascular system, which includes the heart, blood, and blood vessels, is responsible for circulating and transporting blood throughout the body. Within the heart, the atria and ventricles work together to collect blood from the body and lungs and return blood to the lungs and body, respectively. The respiratory system collects deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle, oxygenates the blood, and returns the oxygenated blood to the left ventricle to be pumped throughout the body. The ability to breathe is driven by a functioning respiratory system, because the inhaled oxygen is used to oxygenate the blood and the unnecessary carbon dioxide is expelled from the body through expiration.

The endocrine system secretes hormones that are responsible for physiological functioning as well as growth and development. Hormone functionality is interdependent with the cardiovascular system because hormones travel through the bloodstream. In short, hormones function to regulate growth and development, metabolism, and reproduction, as well as cardiorespiratory and digestive function. Further to this point, hormones communicate with other systems, such as the musculoskeletal and cardiorespiratory systems, to provide the energy for movement as well as the needed response to stressors with respect to both growth and recovery.

The digestive system provides a vital role in the physiological functioning of the body; it is the entry-level system that provides the basis for the energy we need for movement and internal homeostasis. Beginning with the oral cavity, which processes food and liquids in preparation for the upper gastrointestinal system, the food is broken down in a process called mastication and ultimately passes to the stomach. The stomach, which is part of the upper gastrointestinal system, absorbs and further breaks down food to allow passage into the small intestine, which further digests food and is a key player in absorption. The small intestine prepares the consumed foods and liquids for the lower GI system, which includes the large intestine, rectum, and anus, where nondigested food and waste are expelled.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

The cardiorespiratory system is composed of the cardiovascular system and the respiratory system. Together, they provide the body with oxygen, nutrients, protective agents, and a means to remove waste products. The cardiovascular system is composed of the heart, blood, and blood vessels. The heart is located in the mediastinum and is made up of involuntary cardiac muscle, which contracts according to a built-in rhythm to regularly pump blood throughout the body. It is divided into four chambers: two atria (which gather blood from the body) and two ventricles (which pump blood out to the body) on each side.

Heart rate and the stroke volume make up the overall performance of the heart. Cardiac output is the combination of the number of times the heart beats per minute and the amount of blood being pumped out with each beat. Heart rate can be monitored manually or through the use of a heart rate monitor.

Blood acts as a medium to deliver and collect essential products to and from the tissues of the body, providing an internal transportation, regulation, and protection system. The blood vessels that transport blood away from the heart are called arteries, which have smaller components called arterioles. The vessels that return blood to the heart are called veins, which have smaller components called venules. Capillaries are the smallest blood vessels and connect venules with arterioles.