---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Stretch-Shortening Cycle

The **stretch-shortening cycle** is a term used to describe a loaded eccentric muscle action that prepares muscles and tendons for a rapid concentric contraction. The eccentric muscle action represents the *stretch* component, which stores elastic energy from the springlike nature of contractile tissue. The stored energy is a result of the **series elastic component** of muscle and tendon (mostly tendon) (Kisner & Colby, 2007).

### HELPFUL HINT

The stretch-shortening cycle is similar to stretching a rubber band. Stretching the rubber band stores elastic energy. Once the rubber band is released, the elastic energy is transformed into kinetic energy, and the rubber band flies through the air. The same sort of principle applies to our body’s muscle and connective tissue. When a person needs to jump, they will first perform a shallow squat prior to initiating the jump—this is the body’s version of pulling on the rubber band.

After energy is stored, the contractile tissue releases this elastic energy during the concentric phase. The storage and release of this elastic energy increases force production if the time between the eccentric and concentric phase is rapid. Specifically, the **amortization phase** is used to describe this transition (Kisner & Colby, 2007). The goal of increased force production, hence, improved performance, depends on a rapid amortization phase. A rapid amortization phase requires both contractile tissue storage of energy and the neurological **stretch reflex **(Kisner & Colby, 2007).

Use of the stretch-shortening cycle in exercise is the basis for plyometric training, in which jump-landing tasks eccentrically load the muscles (the landing) to achieve a more explosive concentric contraction (the jump). The more rapidly a client can move through the amortization phase, the more powerful the concentric contraction will be, which is known as the** integrated performance paradigm**. When executed properly, this type of training helps produce the necessary neural and muscular adaptations to improve speed, power, and sport-specific improvements (McArdle et al., 2016).

For example, the appropriate implementation of a depth-jump exercise involves jumping off a box and dropping immediately into a squat position for the landing. Moving into this squat position stores elastic energy via the series elastic component, then the release of that stored elastic energy combines with the concentric contraction to more powerfully drive the jump. If the amortization phase is prolonged, stored energy will dissipate, the neurological stretch reflex will not be optimally activated, and the concentric unloading phase will be less powerful.

The concept of the stretch-shortening cycle can also be applied within the context of agility drills, which require repeated switching from deceleration to acceleration. This switch is the stretch-shortening cycle in action, requiring a rapid reversal of muscle action from eccentric (loading) to isometric (amortization) to concentric (unloading). Essentially, any time a muscle is eccentrically loaded, those elastic forces can be amortized and released to provide a more powerful concentric contraction.

## Key Terms

**Stretch-shortening cycle**
Loading of a muscle eccentrically to prepare it for a rapid concentric contraction.

**Series elastic component**
Springlike noncontractile component of muscle and tendon that stores elastic energy.

**Amortization phase**
The transition from eccentric loading to concentric unloading during the stretch-shortening cycle.

**Stretch reflex**
Neurological signal from the muscle spindle that causes a muscle to contract to prevent excessive lengthening.

**Integrated performance paradigm**
To move with efficiency, forces must be dampened (eccentrically), stabilized (isometrically), and then accelerated (concentrically).