---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### MUSCLE BALANCE

Length-tension relationships relate closely to the concept of **muscle balance**. Recall that on each side of a joint there are agonist and antagonist muscles; when one contracts and shortens, the other has to relax and lengthen if movement is to occur. When all muscles surrounding a joint have optimal length-tension relationships, neither side is pulling harder than the other, and they will hold that joint in an optimal position for the most efficient movement.

If a muscle’s resting length is either too long or too short on one side of a joint, however, it has an **altered length-tension relationship**. This creates imbalance around the joint, where one side is contracted and pulling more than it should be and the other side is allowing to be pulled into a lengthened state with reduced actin/myosin overlap, putting the joint into a suboptimal resting position (**Figure 7-16**).

A joint being held in a suboptimal position like this is the basis for poor posture. For example, if a person’s adductor muscles on the inside of the thighs are in a contracted/shortened position and consequently the abductor muscles on the outside of the hips (i.e., gluteus medius) are in a lengthened position, a knock-kneed posture will be created, which puts unnecessary stress on the joints and can lead to discomfort and increased risk of injury (Ford et al., 2015; Padua et al., 2012).

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

The scientific term that describes the nervous system’s role in the contract-relax relationship between agonists and antagonists is called **reciprocal inhibition**. When the agonist for a movement receives a signal (a motor neuron impulse) to contract, the central nervous system also sends a signal that inhibits the antagonist’s activation signals at the same time, causing it to relax. For example, to perform the biceps curl exercise, the biceps brachii (agonist) must contract, while simultaneously, the triceps brachii (antagonist) must relax for the movement to occur.

When muscles have altered length-tension relationships, the normal process of reciprocal inhibition becomes altered. **Altered reciprocal inhibition** is when an agonist muscle chronically receives an activation signal causing the functional antagonist to chronically receive the inhibitory signal.

When a muscle is chronically overactive, it is in a state of elevated neural activity, which causes the muscle to be in a constant state of contraction. When a muscle is chronically underactive, it is in a state of inhibited neural drive. In this situation, the overactive muscle pulls the joint too much in one direction, while the underactive muscle does not activate enough to resist that pull. The result is that the joint is held in a suboptimal position (poor postural alignment) due to a **muscle imbalance**.

Formal assessments of a client’s posture will help identify muscle imbalances. Then, flexibility techniques can be used to calm down muscle overactivity, and strengthening techniques can be used to improve the neural activation of underactive muscles. This helps restore optimal length-tension relationships within the muscles, restores balance around the joint, and allows the joint to be held in its most efficient **neutral position**.

## Key Terms

**Muscle balance**
When all muscles surrounding a joint have optimal length-tension relationships, allowing the joint to rest in a neutral position.

**Altered length-tension relationship**
When a muscle’s resting length is too short or too long, reducing the amount of force it can produce.

**Reciprocal inhibition**
When an agonist receives a signal to contract, its functional antagonist also receives an inhibitory signal allowing it to lengthen.

**Altered reciprocal inhibition**
Occurs when an overactive agonist muscle decreases the neural drive to its functional antagonist.

**Muscle imbalance**
When muscles on each side of a joint have altered length-tension relationships.

**Neutral position**
The optimal resting position of a joint that allows it to function efficiently through its entire normal range of motion.

## Images

**Figure 7-16: Altered length-tension relationship (muscle imbalance)**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF16.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533