---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Muscle Actions
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# GETTING TECHNICAL

When performing a biceps curl exercise with the palm facing up, the biceps brachii is the primary muscle targeted. Changing the hand position to palm down targets the brachialis to a greater degree, whereas performing the exercise with the thumb up (hammer curls) targets the brachioradialis muscle to a greater extent. During all three versions of the curl exercise, all of the elbow flexors are recruited concurrently; however, the degree of recruitment for each muscle differs with each hand and forearm position (Kendall et al., 2005; Levangie et al., 2019).

A second example to help illustrate muscle actions is the squat exercise. To initiate the squat from a standing position, the individual squats down, flexing at the hips, knees, and ankles (**Figure 7-11**). As the individual squats downward, the gluteal muscles and quadriceps mechanically lengthen while simultaneously decelerating the force of the individual’s bodyweight; this is the eccentric muscle action of the squat exercise. The isometric muscle action occurs when the individual pauses at the bottom position and no joint motion is visible. Lastly, the concentric muscle action occurs when the individual extends at the ankles, knees, and hips to return to the starting position, concentrically contracting the gluteal muscles and quadriceps (i.e., the lifting phase) (**Figure 7-12**).

# TRAINING TIP

The integrated function of the HMS can be recognized during a squat. Clients with limited dorsiflexion of the ankle will be limited in the depth of their squat during the eccentric phase. A quick method for these individuals to gain a deeper squat ROM is to place a small board (or weight plates) under their heels. A longer-term solution would be to address the stiffness of the ankle joints by performing routine stretching (Macrum et al., 2012).

## Images

**Figure 7-11: Back squat— eccentric motion**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF11.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 7-12: Back squat— concentric motion**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF12.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533