---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Muscle Actions
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Muscle Actions

There are three overarching types of muscle actions: isotonic, isometric, and isokinetic (**Table 7-2**) (Kendall et al., 2005). Isotonic muscle action can be subdivided into either concentric or eccentric muscle actions depending on if a source of resistance is moving with or against gravity.

**TABLE 7-2 Types of Muscle Actions**

| Action | Performance |
|---|---|
| Isotonic | Force is produced, muscle tension is developed, and movement occurs through a given range of motion. Isotonic muscle actions are subdivided into concentric and eccentric muscle actions. |
| Isometric | Muscle tension is created without a change in muscle length and no visible movement of the joint. |
| Isokinetic | The speed of movement is fixed, and resistance varies with the force exerted.

It requires sophisticated training equipment often seen in rehabilitation or exercise physiology laboratories. |

### ISOTONIC

In an isotonic muscle contraction, force is produced as a muscle develops tension while visibly changing in length. Isotonic muscle actions are classified as either eccentric or concentric and represent the *lowering* and *lifting* phases of resistance training exercises, respectively. For example, during a biceps curl, the biceps brachii muscle contracts concentrically and shortens to flex the elbow and curl the dumbbell up to the shoulder and contracts eccentrically while the elbow extends and lowers the dumbbell back down.

#### ECCENTRIC

An **eccentric muscle action** occurs when a muscle develops tension while lengthening (Kendall et al., 2005). The muscle lengthens because the external force acting on the muscle (i.e., the source of resistance) is greater than the internal muscle force. As the muscle lengthens, the actin and myosin cross-bridges are pulled apart and reattach, allowing the muscle to functionally lengthen (see Chapter 5 for more details regarding muscular anatomy). In actuality, the lengthening of the muscle as described here refers to its return to a resting length and not actually increasing in its length as if it were being stretched (Levangie et al., 2019).

Eccentric muscle actions are more efficient than concentric contractions and require less energy to complete a task, such as lifting a weight (Franchi et al., 2017; Lastayo et al., 2014). One reason for this is that fewer **motor units** are required during the eccentric phase as compared to the concentric phase when the same weight or resistance is used (Franchi et al., 2017; Levangie et al., 2019).

An eccentric motion is synonymous with deceleration and can be observed in many movements, such as landing from a jump or lowering weights during a resistance exercise. Oftentimes, eccentric muscle action is referred to as negative work. The term negative was derived from the fact that in eccentric movement, work is actually being done on the muscle, such as slowing a load being pulled toward the earth by gravity, rather than the muscle doing the work, such as internal muscular forces generated to move a load against gravity. This is related to the fact that eccentric motion moves in the same direction as the resistance is moving, known as direction of resistance (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Levangie et al., 2019).

In functional activities, such as daily movements and sports, muscles work eccentrically as much as they do concentrically or isometrically. Eccentrically, the muscles must decelerate (reduce) the forces acting on the body. This is seen in all forms of exercise; whether walking on a treadmill or bench pressing, the weight of either the body or an external load must be decelerated before it can be stabilized isometrically and subsequently accelerated concentrically.

## Key Terms

**Eccentric muscle action**
A muscle action that occurs when a muscle develops tension while lengthening.

**Motor unit**
A motor neuron and all of the muscle fibers that it innervates.