---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Planes of Motion
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### SCAPULAR MOTION

Motions of the scapulae (i.e., the shoulder blades) are important for the fitness professional to be familiar with to ensure proper movement of the shoulder complex. Isolated scapular movements— termed *translations*, because they do not rotate around a fixed axis—are primarily retraction, protraction, elevation, and depression (Levangie et al., 2019) (**Figure 7-8**).

**Scapular retraction** occurs when the shoulder blades come closer together. **Scapular protraction** occurs when the shoulder blades move further away from each other. **Scapular depression** occurs when the shoulder blades move downward, and **scapular elevation **occurs when the shoulder blades move upward toward the ears (Levangie et al., 2019).

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Scapular retraction requires several muscles, including the middle trapezius and rhomboids. Scapular protraction primarily requires the serratus anterior muscle, with some assistance from the pectoral muscles.

## Key Terms

**Scapular retraction**
Adduction of scapulae; shoulder blades move toward the midline.

**Scapular protraction**
Abduction of scapulae; shoulder blades move away from the midline.

**Scapular depression**
Downward (inferior) motion of the scapulae.

**Scapular elevation**
Upward (superior) motion of the scapulae.

## Images

**Figure 7-8: Scapular movements**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH07_FIGF08.JPG?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533