---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Third-class levers have the effort placed between the resistance and the fulcrum. The effort always travels a shorter distance and must be greater than the resistance. Most limbs of the human body operate as third-class levers. An example of a third-class lever is the human forearm; the fulcrum is the elbow, the effort is applied by the biceps brachii muscle, and the load is in the hand, such as a dumbbell when performing a biceps curl. Another example of a third-class lever is the standing hamstring curl, whereby the knee joint is the fulcrum, hamstring muscle is the effort, and resistance is at the ankle.

# HELPFUL HINT

When trying to remember the levers, think of the pneumonic F-R-E-1-2-3. This means that fulcrum is in middle for a first-class lever (F, 1), resistance is in the middle for the second-class lever (R, 2), with the effort in middle for a third-class lever (E, 3).

Applying the concept of levers to the principles of the HMS, bones act as lever arms that move a load from the force applied by the muscles. This movement around an axis can be termed **rotary motion** and implies that the bones rotate around joints (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Levangie et al., 2019). This turning effect of the joint is often referred to as **torque** (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Levangie et al., 2019). Torque is a measurement of the amount of force that can cause an object to rotate around an axis. Torque relies on force, the length of the lever arm, and the angle between the force application and the lever arm.

# HELPFUL HINT

An example of torque is using a wrench to loosen a bolt. The wrench serves as a lever, and torque would be a product of the force applied to the wrench and the length of the wrench’s handle. Increasing the length of the wrench’s handle would increase the torque applied to the bolt.

In resistance training, torque is applied so we can move our joints. Because the neuromuscular system is ultimately responsible for manipulating force, the amount of leverage the HMS will have (for any given movement) depends on the leverage of the muscles in relation to the resistance. The difference between the distance from the weight to the center of the joint, the muscle’s attachment, and the line of pull determines the efficiency with which the muscles manipulate the movement (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Levangie et al., 2019).

## Key Terms

**Rotary motion**
Movement of the bones around the joints.

**Torque**
A force that produces rotation; common unit of measurement is the Newton meter (Nm).