---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Functional Anatomy of Muscles
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Functional Anatomy of Muscles

To more effectively understand human movement and to design efficient exercise programs, it is important to view muscles’ capacities to function in all planes of motion and through the entire muscle action spectrum (eccentric, isometric, concentric). In addition, muscles can also work synergistically to produce force, stabilize the body, and reduce force under direct control of the nervous system. The more that functional anatomy is understood, the more specific an exercise program can become. To explore the muscles of the body in more detail, refer to **Appendix C**.

## Muscles as Movers

Muscles provide the human body with a variety of functions that allow for the manipulation of forces placed on the body to either produce, stabilize, or resist movement. During functional movements, a muscle can be categorized as either an agonist, synergist, stabilizer, or antagonist depending on the joint motion being performed. 

**Agonists** are muscles that act as the prime movers for a joint motion; in other words, they are the muscles most responsible for generating the primary forces for a particular movement. For example, the gluteus maximus is the agonist for hip extension, the quadriceps are the agonists for knee extension, the anterior deltoid is the agonist for shoulder flexion, the biceps brachii is the agonist for elbow flexion, and the triceps brachii is the agonist for elbow extension (Kendall et al., 2005; Levangie et al., 2019). 

**Synergist** muscles create forces to assist prime movers but are not intended as the primary force producer for a given joint motion. For example, the hamstring complex and the erector spinae (muscles of the back) are synergistic with the gluteus maximus during hip extension (Kendall et al., 2005), whereas the brachioradialis and brachialis (forearm muscles) assist the biceps brachii during a biceps curl. Additional examples include the triceps brachii assisting the pectoral muscles during a chest press and the biceps brachii assisting the latissimus dorsi during a pull-up. 

**Stabilizer** muscles contract isometrically to support and stabilize the joints, while the prime movers and synergists move through the entire muscle action spectrum to perform a movement. For example, the transversus abdominis (a deep abdominal muscle), internal obliques, and multifidus (deep muscles of the spine) stabilize the LPHC during hip extension. Another example is the rotator cuff muscles (supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis), which stabilize the shoulder during upper extremity movements (Day et al., 2012).

### GETTING TECHNICAL

An interesting fact regarding stabilization is that certain muscles have the ability to stabilize a joint by contracting automatically in anticipation of movement (Day et al., 2012; Masse-Alarie et al., 2012). This anticipatory stabilization effect is referred to as **feed-forward activation**.

Lastly, **antagonist **muscles perform the opposite action of the prime mover. For example, the biceps brachii (an elbow flexor) is an antagonist to the triceps brachii during elbow extension. Conversely, during elbow flexion, the triceps become the antagonist to the biceps. Another example includes how the hip flexor complex is antagonistic to the gluteus maximus during hip extension, whereas the gluteus maximus is antagonistic to the hip flexor complex during hip flexion.

## Key Terms

**Agonists**
The primary muscles providing force for a movement.

**Synergists**
Muscles that assist agonists to produce a movement.

**Stabilizers**
Muscles that contract isometrically to stabilize the trunk and joints as the body moves.

**Feed-forward activation**
When a muscle is automatically activated in anticipation of a movement.

**Antagonists**
Muscles on the opposite side of a joint that are in direct opposition of agonist muscles.