---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Planes of Motion
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### MOVEMENT ATTRIBUTES

The HMS is complex and requires not only the integrative function of different systems but also cooperative efforts within the systems. Generally speaking, movement can be described in terms of the predominant movement plane and the specific motions at the joints; however, movement can also be classified as being normal or dysfunctional. Normal movement represents efficient, cooperative functioning of the skeletal, nervous, and muscular systems (Kendall et al., 2005). Normal movement requires a joint to be able to move through its full ROM, which requires normal osteo- and arthrokinematics (Levangie et al., 2019).

The amount of movement determined to be normal would depend on the activity of interest. For example, certain sports require greater joint ROMs than standard activities of daily living, as is seen in the difference between the motion of the shoulders when pitching a baseball and simply washing one’s hair. Full ROM requires normal **elasticity** of the capsule and **ligaments**** **surrounding the joint and normal muscle length and **flexibility**, as well as normally functioning neurological and muscular systems. Clients with **hypermobility** (excessive ROM at a joint) generally would be expected to have a lack of firm ligamentous support, whereas those with **hypomobility** (limited ROM at a joint) generally have restricted length of the muscular structures that cross the joint (Kendall et al., 2005).

## Key Terms

**Elasticity**
The ability of soft tissues to return to resting length after being stretched.

**Ligament**
A fibrous connective tissue that connects bone to bone.

**Flexibility**
The normal extensibility of soft tissues that allows for full range of motion of a joint.

**Hypermobility**
A state where a lack of neuromuscular support leads to a joint having more range of motion than it should, greatly increasing the risk of injury at that joint.

**Hypomobility**
When range of motion at a joint is limited.