---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Motor Behavior
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Muscle synergies represent the interworking relationship between agonist and synergist muscle roles for a given movement pattern. Through the practice of proper exercise technique and form, these synergies become more fluent and automated. **Table 7-3** explores muscle synergies for some common gym exercises.

**TABLE 7-3 Muscle Synergies for Common Exercises**

| Exercise | Muscle Synergies |
|---|---|
| Squat | Agonists: quadriceps, gluteus maximus
Synergist: hamstrings complex
Stabilizer: transverse abdominis |
| Shoulder press | Agonists: deltoids
Synergist: triceps brachii
Stabilizers: rotator cuff |
| Bench press | Agonist: pectoralis major
Synergists: triceps brachii, anterior deltoid
Stabilizer: rotator cuff |
| Seated row | Agonist: latissimus dorsi
Synergists: posterior deltoid, biceps brachii
Stabilizers: rotator cuff |

### PROPRIOCEPTION

**Mechanoreceptors** collectively feed the nervous system with a form of sensory information known as **proprioception**. Proprioception uses information from the mechanoreceptors (i.e., muscle spindles, Golgi tendon organs, and joint receptors) to provide information about body position, movement, and sensation as it pertains to muscle and joint force (Newton, 2003). Proprioception is a vital source of information that the nervous system uses to gather information about the environment to produce the most efficient and precise movement.

For example, proprioceptive input may provide a runner with a cue to contract the ankle muscles to avoid an inversion injury. Research has demonstrated that although proprioception may help prevent injury, it is altered after injury. This means that many of today’s health club members may have altered proprioception as a result of past injuries. This provides a rationale for the inclusion of both core and balance training to enhance one’s proprioceptive capabilities.

#### TRY THIS

Sit in a chair with your eyes closed. Next, raise your right arm above your head. Then, move your arm in a small circular motion five times. Stop and open your eyes.

How were you able to understand what your arm was doing? You couldn’t see, smell, taste, hear, or touch your right arm as it moved, but somehow you were able to internally sense what your arm was doing. This internal sensation is proprioception at work.

## Key Terms

**Mechanoreceptors**
Specialized structures that respond to mechanical forces (touch and pressure) within tissues and then transmit signals through sensory nerves.

**Proprioception**
The body’s ability to naturally sense its general orientation and relative position of its parts.