---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Planes of Motion
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
**Abduction** is a movement away from the midline of the body. Similar to extension, it is an increase in the angle between two adjoining segments, except in the frontal plane.** Adduction **is a movement of a segment toward the midline of the body. Like flexion, it is a decrease in the angle between two adjoining segments, except in the frontal plane (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Kendall et al., 2005; Levangie et al., 2019).

**Lateral flexion** is the bending of the spine from side to side in the frontal plane. Additionally, similar to flexion and extension, joint motion at the feet is termed a bit differently. **Eversion** and **inversion** follow the same principle as lateral flexion but relate specifically to the pendulum-like movement of the calcaneus (heel bone) and tarsals (ankle bones) in the frontal plane (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Kendall et al., 2005; Levangie et al., 2019). When a foot everts, the calcaneus swings laterally (away from the midline); when a foot inverts, the calcaneus swings medially (toward the midline). Examples of predominantly frontal plane exercises include jumping jacks, side lunges, lateral shoulder raises, and side shuffling.

# HELPFUL HINT

To better understand the frontal plane, imagine walls in front of and behind you, with no room to move forward or backward or to rotate. Like last time, the walls are made completely of glass, which you do not want to break. As a result, movements in the frontal plane are primarily side-to-side motions.

## Key Terms

**Abduction**
A movement in the frontal plane away from the midline of the body.

**Adduction**
Movement in the frontal plane back toward the midline of the body.

**Lateral flexion**
Bending of the spine from side to side.

**Eversion**
A movement in which the inferior calcaneus (heel bone) moves laterally. The bottom of foot faces outward.

**Inversion**
A movement in which the inferior calcaneus (heel bone) moves medially. Bottom of foot faces inward.

## Images

Alt: Man standing between plates of glass against his front and back sides.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_UNNUN02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533