---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The other 11 amino acids are called **nonessential amino acids**, which means that they can be synthesized by the body (from consumed carbohydrate or fat substrates) as long as overall nutrition intake is adequate.

When a person consumes protein, it is broken down into its component amino acids. Those amino acid building blocks will then, ideally, be used to synthesize human bodily proteins that build up muscle and repair cellular machinery. However, the amino acids from dietary protein can also supply energy for ATP production if carbohydrate and fat sources are low. This situation should happen rarely to “spare protein,” which is why adequate carbohydrate intake is important, especially after intense exercise; therefore, glycogen stores get replenished from the carbohydrate source, and amino acids can fulfill their main postexercise role: build and repair muscle.

Protein rarely supplies much energy during exercise and, in many descriptions, is ignored as a significant fuel source for energy metabolism (Mitchell et al., 2016; Phillips, 2017). During a **negative energy balance**, amino acids are used to assist in energy production and can come from protein that was eaten or from the breakdown of muscle tissue itself in extreme cases, like starvation or when exercising at extremely high intensities for long periods of time (for example, with Olympic marathon runners). Before amino acids can be used to make ATP, they are further broken down and then recombined into either glucose through a process called **gluconeogenesis** or ketone bodies through a process called **ketogenesis** (Maughan, 2005; McArdle et al., 2010).

### KETONE BODIES

**Ketone bodies** is the name collectively used to refer to three molecules—acetone, acetoacetic acid, and beta-hydroxybutyric acid—that can be anaerobically metabolized similar to glucose. These molecules are produced by the liver as a by-product of the breakdown of fatty acids or through the conversion of ketogenic amino acids. The human body does not have the ability to store these molecules, so they are only used acutely to produce energy and are not stored for later like glycogen (Miller et al., 2018). Even though the body does primarily run on free fatty acids during low-intensity activity and rest, it still needs carbohydrate substrates to properly function. So, when carbohydrate stores run low, ketone bodies are produced and used alongside gluconeogenic glucose to help make up for the deficiency. During this metabolic state, the body is said to be in **ketosis**. Ketone levels can increase in the human body in several ways:

	- By restricting overall calories to very low levels

	- By following very low-carbohydrate diets (e.g., ketogenic diet)

	- By consuming **exogenous ketones**

	- When there is a lack of insulin produced (type 1 diabetes) or substantial **insulin resistance** (type 2 diabetes)

In most cases, when humans engage in the previous dietary habits 1–3, their ketone levels can increase to approximately 0.5–1.5 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) of blood, which is known as nutritional ketosis. This is a different physiological state than what is known as **ketoacidosis**, which mostly occurs in diabetic individuals. For most people, ketones make up a small portion of the energy-producing substrates in the human body, even in nutritional ketosis. However, there is some research studying the effect of ketosis and ketone-producing diets, such as ketogenic diets, for exercise performance (LaFountain et al., 2019; Volek et al., 2016).

## Key Terms

**Nonessential amino acids**
Amino acids that can be synthesized by the body and do not, under normal circumstances, need to be obtained in the diet.

**Negative energy balance**
When calorie intake is lower than the number of calories expended.

**Gluconeogenesis**
The formation of glucose from noncarbohydrate sources (proteins and fats).

**Ketogenesis**
The formation of ketone bodies from nonfat sources, such as certain amino acids.

**Ketone bodies**
Water-soluble molecules produced in the liver as a result of fatty acid oxidation. They can then be oxidized in the mitochondria to produce adenosine triphosphate.

**Ketosis**
A state of carbohydrate depletion where the liver manufactures ketone bodies to meet energy demands that free fatty acid oxidation cannot support.

**Exogenous ketones**
Isolated ketone bodies usually consumed in supplement form.

**Insulin resistance**
The inability of the cells to respond to insulin; occurs in type 2 diabetes.

**Ketoacidosis**
Metabolic acidosis induced by very high levels of ketone bodies such as seen in type 1 diabetes or severe insulin resistance.