---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Daily Energy Needs
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### ENERGY EXPENDED DURING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

While most of the energy (calories) that a person burns during the day is due to the basic metabolic processes that sustain life, any type of activity or exercise also burns calories and therefore raises TDEE. Physical activity can be broken down into two categories: structured, purposeful exercise (EAT) and nonexercise activities (NEAT), such as cleaning the house or shopping for groceries. Exercise can increase energy expenditure both during the activity itself and afterward via increased metabolic rate and recovery processes.

The utilization of 1 liter of oxygen during aerobic activity requires 5 kcal (calories) of energy, so longer-duration or higher-intensity aerobic activities can burn a considerable number of calories. The **physical activity level (PAL)** has been quantified as the total daily energy expenditure divided by the resting energy expenditure (Westerterp, 2013). The physical activity level quantifies a person’s activity level by comparing the number of calories burned while active to the amount burned while sedentary. Some evidence suggests that the ideal physical activity level ratio for a sustainable lifestyle ranges from 1:1–2:5, which peaks during reproductive age and declines somewhat later in life (Westerterp, 2013).

##### GETTING TECHNICAL

Another way that activity is sometimes quantified is by **metabolic equivalent (MET)**. One MET is equal to 3.5 mL of oxygen consumed per kilogram of body weight per minute (3.5 mL O~2~/kg per min), which is the average resting metabolic rate for the greater population (McArdle et al., 2010). A moderate-intensity activity might require 5 METs (5 times RMR, or 17–18 mL/kg per min), and a very high-intensity activity might require 9 or more METs (9 times RMR or >30 mL/kg per min).

#### NONEXERCISE ACTIVITY THERMOGENESIS

NEAT refers to the burning of calories from activity that occurs independent of structured, planned exercise. Factors like standing instead of sitting, fidgeting, shivering, and daily tasks, such as walking to the parking lot and doing household chores, are all components of NEAT. NEAT levels can vary tremendously across populations and may contribute up to 20% of TDEE in people who have nonsedentary jobs (e.g., manual labor). Some research has suggested that certain individuals have greater inherent tendency to perform NEAT—such as people who fidget more—and that higher levels of daily NEAT may be protective against obesity (Levine, 2007; Villablanca et al., 2015). While some people may be more predisposed to unconsciously engage in NEAT than others, anyone can choose to incorporate more NEAT into their day by including things like using a standing desk, parking farther away in the parking lot, pacing while on the phone, and taking the stairs instead of the elevator.

## Key Terms

**Physical activity level (PAL)**
The number of calories a person expends through physical activity and structured exercise.

**Metabolic equivalent (MET)**
A measurement used to describe the energy cost of physical activity as multiples of resting metabolic rate. One MET is 3.5 mL of oxygen consumption per kilogram per minute.