---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Energy During Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Estimating Fuel Contribution During Activity

At lower intensities, the body is using primarily fat for fuel, which results in a lot of ATP being produced, some oxygen being used, and relatively less carbon dioxide being produced. As the exercise intensity increases, the rate at which ATP needs to be produced increases, so more oxygen needs to be delivered to the mitochondria. This causes an increase in breathing volume (i.e., the length and depth of breaths) and is a hallmark of reaching VT1. However, as exercise intensity continues to increase, aerobic metabolism of fat cannot be used to create ATP fast enough, so the body shifts to relying on glucose for fuel via glycolysis (Romijn et al., 1993).

This change in fuel source also means that more carbon dioxide will be produced, which needs to be exhaled. As a result, breathing rate must increase, not only to deliver more oxygen but now also to exhale the increasing amounts of carbon dioxide being produced. This point, where breathing becomes rapid enough that talking is extremely difficult to impossible, marks VT2.

In summary, at VT1, a person needs to take in more air to supply more oxygen to the mitochondria to help support the oxidative metabolism of free fatty acids. Then, at VT2, a person is relying primarily on anaerobic metabolism, and the body becomes more focused on exhaling carbon dioxide and trying to recover anaerobically, so expiration becomes more forceful making it difficult to talk. Because of this, fitness professionals can use a “talk test” to help determine if a client is working aerobically or anaerobically. This concept is discussed more in Chapter 11. **Table 8-1** and **Figure 8-11** outline how each of the energy systems contribute to overall energy demand.

**TABLE 8-1 Characteristics of the Three Energy Systems**

|  | ATP-PC | Glycolysis | Oxidative |
|---|---|---|---|
| Fuel Substrate | Phosphocreatine (PC) | Stored glycogen and/or blood glucose | Pyruvate and free fatty acids |
| Intensity Supported | High | Moderate to high | Low to moderate |
| Onset of Maximal ATP Production | 1 sec | 5-10 sec | 2-3 min |
| Time to Exhaustion of the System | 10-15 sec | 30-60 sec | Theoretically unlimited |
| Ultimate Limiting Factor(s) | Depletion of ATP-PC stores | Lactate and CO2 accumulation | Insufficient oxygen, heat accumulation, muscle fatigue |

^(Adapted from Wells et al., 2009)^

## Images

**Figure 8-11: Energy system contribution by effort duration**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF11.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533