---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Energy and Mechanical Work
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### GLYCOLYSIS

As PC stores begin to exhaust, a slightly slower (but still relatively rapid) anaerobic energy system is ramping up. This is the first step in the chemical breakdown of glucose in a process referred to as **glycolysis **(**Figure 8-5**). The process of glycolysis turns free blood glucose or stored glycogen into pyruvate and ATP. Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm of an animal cell (**Figure 8-6**). This anaerobically created ATP can then be used directly the same way as the ATP created by the ATP-PC system. This system can produce a significantly greater amount of energy than the ATP-PC system, but it is a bit slower to ramp up to its full ATP production capabilities. However, it lasts longer, with a capacity of approximately 30 to 60 seconds of duration, which can be increased by several seconds through the use of high-intensity styles of training (Burke et al., 2011; Wells et al., 2009).

**Figure 8-5 Glycolysis**Figure 8-6 Animal cell

Most people have enough free glucose in the blood and stored glycogen to fuel anaerobic glycolysis for many repeated bursts, such as a sprint workout or a session of high-intensity interval training (Maughan, 2005). However, for most people, those carbohydrate sources run out after around 1 hour of sustained activity, which is why carbohydrate drinks or gels are helpful to keep the body performing at its best when an event lasts longer than 60 minutes.

Glycolysis is directly linked with the oxidative system by the pyruvate by-product that is created. It can be treated in two different ways depending on whether or not there is oxygen present. If there is oxygen available, the pyruvate is further broken down, enters the oxidative system, and leads to the creation of additional ATP. If oxygen cannot be delivered fast enough, the pyruvate will be converted into a molecule called lactate, which contributes to the “burn” felt during strenuous exercise as it accumulates in muscle tissue (the accumulation of CO~2~ in muscle tissue at a rate faster than it can be removed also factors into the burning feeling).

## Key Terms

**Glycolysis**
A metabolic process that occurs in the cytosol of a cell that converts glucose into pyruvate and adenosine triphosphate. Anaerobic glycolysis refers to when this process occurs in the absence of oxygen.

## Images

**Figure 8-5: Glycolysis**
Alt: Glycolysis.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 8-6: Animal cell**
Alt: Animal cell
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533