---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 8
lesson_title: Goal-Based Nutrition Strategies
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Muscle Gain Strategies

Building muscle is an anabolic process that requires both the stimulation of muscle protein synthesis (MPS) and the availability of adequate fuel. Adequate caloric intake, especially adequate protein intake combined with resistance training, remains an essential element for increasing muscle mass. One study suggests that a caloric surplus is not necessary to stimulate muscle protein synthesis and an increase in fat-free mass, if protein intake is sufficiently high (Longland et al., 2016). Protein intake in the range of 1.6–2.2 g/kg of body weight appears to be optimal for muscle protein synthesis (Stokes et al., 2018), with some studies indicating that protein intake at 1.6 g/kg per day seems to be associated with the greatest increases in muscle mass (Morton et al., 2018). Intake at higher levels appears to confer no added benefit to MPS, unless in a net caloric deficit for fat loss, in which case a protein intake in the range of 2.4 g/kg of body weight has been shown to lessen the loss of fat-free mass and actually promote MPS (Longland et al., 2016). Even though a caloric surplus may not be necessary for MPS when protein intake is sufficiently high, individual factors and training history need to be considered. Bodybuilders, powerlifters, hard gainers, or athletes seeking to increase fat-free mass to support sports performance will likely benefit from a caloric surplus to support muscle **hypertrophy**. The specific amount of the surplus will vary from individual to individual to account for genetic differences in energy metabolism and differences in training volume and load. However, the recommended range for a caloric surplus may be in the realm of 350 to 500 calories per day to support muscle hypertrophy (Slater et al., 2019).

### MACRONUTRIENT COMPOSITION

As previously noted, an optimal protein intake for MPS is in the range of 1.6–2.2 g/kg per day (Stokes et al., 2018). Ideally, most of this protein should be HBV, such as dairy (whey in particular), and lean meats, such as poultry and fish, because these provide larger amounts of leucine and the other essential amino acids (Tang et al., 2009) than equivalent amounts of lower BV proteins.

The recommended range for carbohydrate intake for MPS is in the range of 4–7 g/kg per day for resistance-trained athletes (Slater et al., 2019). Athletes seeking to build muscle mass to complement sports performance are recommended to target the higher end of this range to meet both carbohydrate requirements for their sport and support MPS during resistance training (Slater et al., 2019). Given that resistance training can deplete muscle glycogen stores, a supplementary carbohydrate intake may be recommended for higher-volume training, both to fuel workload and to replenish depleted glycogen stores. Fat intake is recommended to remain in the range of 20% to 35% of total calories, as per current dietary guidelines (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2015). Fat intake less than 15% to 20% of total calories is not generally recommended, as this may increase the risk of inadequate intake of essential fatty acids, fat-soluble vitamins, and other nutrients and adversely affect hormone levels (Wang et al., 2005). Given that fat is the most energy dense of the three macronutrients, it can facilitate achieving a caloric surplus for younger athletes and individuals who are hard gainers. However, the type of fat being used to facilitate a caloric surplus should be considered. Excess intake of saturated fats tends to be lipogenic (the metabolic formation of fat) compared to a surplus from polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats (Rosqqvist et al., 2014). Surplus energy from omega-3 fats may also enhance muscle gain when combined with adequate protein and caloric intake (Smith et al., 2011).

### PORTION SIZES AND MEAL TIMING

A caloric surplus can be achieved through a combination of larger portion sizes and/or increased meal frequency. Optimal protein dosing for MPS has been shown to be in the range of 20–40 g per meal (or 0.25–0.40 g/kg per meal) (Kerksick et al., 2018).

## Key Terms

**Hypertrophy**
Enlargement of an organ or tissue; in the context of fitness, it is often used to describe the enlargement of skeletal muscle.