---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 9
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
However, fitness professionals can provide general guidelines on good nutrition practices; explain the importance of nutrition and hydration for health, training, and performance; and direct clients to credible sources of nutrition information and qualified professionals for further guidance. Fitness professionals may also guide clients on sources of the macro- and micronutrients, healthy cooking techniques, and proper sources for obtaining nutrition information on food products, such as reading the nutrition facts panel and ingredients list. For fitness professionals themselves, a basic understanding of the macronutrients (carbohydrates, protein, and lipids) and the micronutrients (vitamins and minerals), and their role in exercise and performance, can supplement the development of a training program for clients. Most clients will have specific training goals, whether these are for fat loss, muscle gain, or sports performance; nutrition certainly plays a key role in helping clients achieve these goals. Although providing specific nutrition prescriptions for these goals is not within the scope of practice of Certified Personal Trainers, an understanding of how nutrition plays a role in fat loss, muscle gain, and sports performance can help clients move in the right direction. In addition, a basic understanding of the role of sleep, medications, and endocrine function on weight and performance can enable fitness professionals to ask clients about these areas in an initial assessment and see if these may be affecting a client’s goals. Nutrition is a scientific field, and research in this area continues to grow. However, there is also a great deal of nutrition information available in the public realm of social media. Clients may not always be able to distinguish between reliable, credible nutrition based on science versus popular trends and fads. Fitness professionals can bridge this gap by understanding where to find credible, reliable nutrition information and guiding clients to these sources for further nutrition information.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

Nutrition is based on the process of acquiring nutrients through food to support energy requirements for growth, repair, and maintenance of tissues, reproduction, digestion, and respiration. Optimal nutrition is important in maintaining health and in achieving weight, body composition, and sports performance goals. Fitness professionals will benefit from an understanding of key nutrition concepts to support their clients’ training goals and an ability to reinforce the importance of good nutrition practices with their clients in pursuit of these goals. The scope of practice for providing medical nutritional therapy falls under the jurisdiction of registered and licensed dietitians and medical professionals. Certified Personal Trainers may guide clients on basic nutrition strategies and direct them toward credible and reliable nutrition resources to help support their body composition, training, or performance goals. Fitness professionals can also provide accountability to clients during training and the implementation of any dietary changes.

In nutrition, the three categories of macronutrients are proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. Proteins are required for the synthesis and repair of cells, tissues, and structures in the body and the synthesis of hormones, enzymes, antibodies, and peptides. Proteins are comprised of amino acids and provide 4 calories per gram. Dietary sources of protein include animal foods, such as meat, poultry, fish, eggs, and dairy (complete sources of protein provide all the essential amino acids), and plant foods, such as soy, legumes, grains, and vegetables (most except soy are incomplete proteins that lack one or more essential amino acids). The current RDA for protein is 0.8 g/kg of body weight as a minimum. However, current sports nutrition guidelines recommend protein intake between 1.2 and 2.0 g/kg body weight for athletes and most exercising individuals. Carbohydrates are comprised of simple sugars, complex carbohydrates, glycogen, and fiber. With the exception of fiber, carbohydrates provide 4 calories per gram and are considered an important source of fuel for the body. Dietary sources of carbohydrates include all plant foods, such as vegetables, fruit, grains, grain products, legumes, and dairy.