---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Carbohydrates
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Clients who are seeking to optimize sports performance and/or to build muscle will benefit from consuming adequate carbohydrates to fuel their activity. Certified Personal Trainers working with such clients may wish to reinforce the importance of adequate carbohydrate intake for effective training. If clients request or seek further guidance for assessing their individual carbohydrate requirements, then they should be directed toward a qualified nutrition professional, such as an RD or CNS, for further guidance. The AMDR suggests that 45% to 65% of calories come from carbohydrates (grains, vegetables, legumes, fruit, and dairy), with a minimum of 130 daily grams of intake based on a 2,000-calorie diet (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2015). Carbohydrate requirements for active individuals will vary and depend on the type, duration, and intensity of activity. **Table**** ****9-12 **lists the current carbohydrate recommendations for clients for different levels of intensity and duration.

**TABLE 9-12 Carbohydrate Recommendations for Athletes**

| Activity | Recommended Carbohydrate per Day |
|---|---|
| Light exercise | 3–5 g/kg of body weight |
| Moderately intense exercise: 1–2 hours per day, 5–6 days per week | 5–7 g/kg of body weight |
| Moderately high-intensity endurance exercise: 1–3 hours per day; 5–6 days per week | 6–10 g/kg of body weight |
| Moderate to high-intensity: > 3 hours per day; 2 sessions per day, 5–6 days per week | 8–10 g/kg of body weight
8–12 g/kg of body weight (ultra-endurance) |
| Source: Burke et al., 2011; Karpinski & Rosenbloom, 2017. |

# GETTING TECHNICAL

Ingested carbohydrates are broken down into glucose and then either oxidized to meet immediate energy needs or stored as glycogen in the liver and muscle. During short, high-intensity anaerobic exercise, the primary fuel source for the activity is carbohydrate—muscle glycogen and the oxidation of some plasma glucose (Cermak & Van Loon, 2013; Coyle, 1995). During longer, lower-intensity aerobic and endurance activities, muscle glycogen meets approximately half of the body’s energy needs, and the remainder is provided via a combination of free fatty acids, intramuscular triglycerides, and glucose (Coyle, 1995; Romijn et al., 1993).

# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Adequate carbohydrate intake is essential to ensure adequate glycogen stores and carbohydrate availability to fuel activity. The majority of carbohydrates should consist of nutrient-dense carbohydrate sources that include vitamins and minerals, such as legumes, vegetables, fruit, and whole grains. However, lower-fiber and simple carbohydrates play an important role in supplying easily digestible sources of fuel immediately before sports events and for rapid glycogen replenishment during recovery (Kerksick et al., 2018).