---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 8
lesson_title: Goal-Based Nutrition Strategies
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
This section provides a highlight of key nutritional guidelines for sports performance, but clients with sports performance goals should be referred to a qualified sports dietitian (CSSD) or certified sports nutritionist (CISSN) for individual guidance on their sports nutritional needs.

# TRAINING TIP

For athletes with sports performance versus muscle hypertrophy goals, one of the primary areas of concern is adequate caloric intake to fuel training and meet other energy requirements (Burke et al., 2006). Calorie needs for recreational athletes may be sufficient at their current intake, which may be within the range of 25–35 kcal/kg per day (Kerksick & Kulovitz, 2013). However, energy needs for competitive athletes and individuals with high-training volumes or multiple training sessions per day may have calorie requirements as high as 40–70 kcal/kg per day (Barrero et al., 2015; Loucks, 2004). For example, an athlete who weighs 150 lb (68 kg) and chooses a strategy of 40 kcal/kg per day would consume 2,720 calories each day (40 × 68 = 2,720).

For endurance athletes, adequate carbohydrate intake remains of utmost importance; they rely heavily on carbohydrates as their primary fuel source, and prolonged and intense periods of training can rapidly deplete muscle glycogen stores (Coyle, 1995). Adequate carbohydrate intake, both during training periods and prior to events, can maximize muscle and liver glycogen stores and optimize performance (Kerksick et al., 2018). The recommended amount of carbohydrate intake for endurance athletes can range from 5 to 12 g/kg per day; the higher end of the range (8 to 10 g/kg) is recommended for athletes training at moderate to high intensities for more than 12 hours per week (Riddell et al., 2003, qtd. in Kersick et al., 2018; Van Hall et al., 2000).

Nutrient timing may be of greater concern for sports and performance athletes, due to high calorie and carbohydrate requirements. For athletes focused on muscle gain, the anabolic effects of exercise last for 24 hours, so the immediate ingestion of protein may not be as important as the adequate intake of protein and essential amino acids over the course of those 24 hours. However, for athletes engaged in sports, those with multiple training sessions per day, and athletes seeking to optimize their performance, nutrient timing may be more crucial, both to optimize glycogen stores and enhance recovery from training sessions. **Table 9-24** lists current sports nutrition recommendations for carbohydrate, protein, and fluid intake prior to, during, and after events for athletes performing at a high level.

**TABLE 9-24 Sports Performance Strategies**

| Strategy | Recommendations |
|---|---|
| Adequate caloric intake | Based on individual needs
	May range from 25 to 30 kcal/kg per day (recreational athletes) 
	Range from 40 to 70 kcal/kg per day (competitive athletes, high-volume, high-intensity training, multiple sessions per day) |
| Adequate carbohydrate intake | Based on individual needs
	In the range of 5–12 g/kg per day
	8–10 g/kg per day for athletes training at moderate to high intensities for more than 12 hours per week |
| Adequate protein intake | Based on individual needs and sport
	1.2–2.0 g/kg per day |
| Adequate fluid intake | Based on individual needs
	16 oz (500 mL) of water or sports drinks (evening prior to event)
	16 oz (500 mL) (morning of an event)
	13–20 oz (400–600 mL) 20–30 minutes prior to event start
	12–16 oz every 10–15 minutes of exercise
	Fluid replacement at 1.25 times the amount of weight lost post event |
| Nutrient timing: carbohydrate | Carbohydrate intake of 1–4 g/kg, 1–4 hours (pre-event)
	30–60 g carbohydrate per hour of activity for events >90 minutes
	1 g/kg per hour for up to 4 hours (post-event) |
| Nutrient timing: protein | 0.3 g/kg per hour for up to 4 hours (post-event) |
| Adequate sleep | 7–9 hours at minimum
	9–10 hours may be required for athletes with intense training (Bird, 2013) |

# CRITICAL

Sports nutrition is a complex area, and dietary needs for athletes and highly active individuals are best assessed by qualified sports dietitians or a certified sports nutritionist (CSSD or CISSN). The guidelines provided in Table 9-24 are current sports nutrition recommendations, but individual needs will vary depending on multiple factors, such as medical history and any medical conditions, food allergies and sensitives, personal preferences, weight, age, training history, and training regimen. In the best interest of clients and professional courtesy for scope of practice, fitness professionals should refer clients with sports performance goals to a registered sports dietitians or certified sports nutritionists for a complete assessment of their needs and personalized recommendations.