---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Lipids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

The optimal ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids is somewhere near 4:1, depending on the population studied. However, the typical Western diet, with a high intake of processed foods, including vegetable oils, tends to include much higher amounts of omega-6 for a ratio closer to 10:1 or 20:1 (Simopoulous, 2003). There is some speculation that this imbalance of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids in the Western diet is one factor related to higher rates of inflammation and chronic disease. However, more of the evidence appears to be linked with obesity and sedentary behavior than the actual dietary ratio of omega-6 to omega-3.

Lipids are diverse in their structure and role in the body. Some clients may not be aware of the different groups of lipids or their role in diet, health, and effect on chronic disease. Fitness professionals should help their clients understand the need and importance of lipids in a healthy diet and the ways in which they support training and fitness goal attainment. Some types of lipids are associated with health-promoting properties, lower rates of inflammation, and chronic disease.

## Lipid Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization

Most lipid digestion and absorption occur in the small intestine, where **pancreatic enzymes** break up long-chain fatty acids into smaller molecules for absorption into enterocytes (**Figure 9-5**). A small amount of dietary fat is initially digested in the mouth by **lingual lipases**. However, the primary site of lipid digestion and absorption is accomplished by the small intestine. **Lipases** (fat-digesting enzymes) break up the ingested lipids into fatty acids and monoglycerides, which are absorbed into enterocytes. The enterocytes then repackage the fatty acids with other fat-soluble nutrients, such as fat-soluble vitamins, into **chylomicrons** and send them to the liver. The liver redistributes the triglycerides as **lipoproteins** (LDL and very low-density) to body tissues where the enzyme **lipoprotein lipase** **(LPL) **cuts up the triglyceride component to release fatty acids. These fatty acids are taken up by cells in muscles, organs, and adipose tissue and either stored or metabolized for energy, depending on the body’s energy needs.

**Figure 9-5 Fat digestion and absorption

## Lipid Dietary Needs

The AMDR for dietary fat is 20% to 35% of total calories for most healthy adults. Both the U.S. Dietary Guidelines 2015–2020 and the Australian Dietary Guidelines recommend that saturated fats be limited to 10% or fewer of total calories and that 10% to 25% of total fat calories be comprised of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats. The British Nutrition Foundation (2018) recommends that not more than 11% of calories should come from saturated fat. As previously noted, both omega-3 and omega-6 are essential types of dietary fat and must be obtained via diet to support metabolic functions.

### FAT AND SATIETY

Lipids are an important macronutrient in the diet, both as a source of energy and as a source of **metabolites** to support various physiological processes. Certain fats, such as omega-3s, are essential and must be included in the diet to support metabolic functions since they cannot be synthesized in the body. Some types of lipids, such as olive oil, are also associated with health benefits; these may improve cardiovascular health when included in a balanced diet (Nocella et al., 2018; Wongwarawipat et al., 2018). However, lipids are easily overconsumed and may contribute to an excess intake of calories for some clients when balance remains an important concept.

## Key Terms

**Pancreatic enzymes**
Digestive enzymes produced by the body to help digest fats, starches, and proteins.

**Lingual lipase**
An enzyme in saliva that begins the process of lipid digestion in the mouth.

**Lipase**
Enzyme that digests lipids.

**Chylomicrons**
Molecules of fat that contain triglycerides, phospholipids, cholesterol, fat-soluble vitamins, and protein. They are formed by intestinal cells after the digestion of lipid-containing foods.

**Lipoprotein**
A group of soluble proteins that combine with and transport fat or other lipids in the blood plasma.

**Lipoprotein lipase (LPL)**
An enzyme that breaks down triglycerides into fatty acids.

**Metabolites**
The formation of a substance required for metabolism.

## Images

**Figure 9-5: Fat digestion and absorption**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH09_FIGF05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533