---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Carbohydrates
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
**TABLE 9-8 Disaccharides**

| Disaccharides | Structure | Found In |
|---|---|---|
| Sucrose | Glucose + Fructose | Table sugar |
| Maltose | Glucose + Glucose | Initial product of starch digestion |
| Lactose | Glucose + Galactose | Milk/dairy |

Disaccharides are two monosaccharides joined together (glucose is present in all) and include sucrose, maltose, and lactose (**Table 9-8**).

**Polysaccharides** are long chains of glucose units that are joined together to form the structures for **starch**, **glycogen**, and **fiber** (**Table 9-9**). Starch is the storage form of carbohydrate in plants, such as vegetables—especially root vegetables—fruit, grains, and seeds. Glycogen, a polysaccharide, is the storage form of carbohydrate in humans and animals; it is stored as liver glycogen and muscle glycogen. Glycogen is an important source of energy during exercise.

Fiber has a structure in which the chemical bonds between the glucose units are not easily broken down by the human digestive system. Therefore, it is not considered to be a significant source of calories in the diet. However, fiber does provide several health benefits that are highlighted in **Table 9-10** and should be part of a healthy diet. U.S. Dietary Guidelines recommend approximately 25 to 28 g of fiber per day for women aged 19 to 50 years, and 30 to 34 g of fiber per day for men aged 19 to 50 years (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2015). Fiber is subdivided into two categories: soluble and insoluble.

**TABLE 9-9 Polysaccharides**

| Polysaccharides | Description |
|---|---|
| Starch | Storage form of carbohydrates in plants. Examples include grains, potatoes, fruit, vegetables, nuts, and seeds. |
| Glycogen | Storage form of carbohydrates in humans and animals. It is stored in the liver and muscle tissue. |
| Fiber | Plant-derived food (also known as roughage) that cannot be completely broken down by the digestive system. Fiber provides several health benefits and includes two types: soluble and insoluble. |

## Key Terms

**Polysaccharides**
A type of carbohydrate composed of long chains of glucose units; starch and glycogen are examples of polysaccharides.

**Starch**
Storage form of carbohydrate in plants.

**Glycogen**
Glucose that is deposited and stored in bodily tissues, such as the liver and muscle cells; the storage form of carbohydrate.

**Fiber**
An indigestible carbohydrate present in plant foods, such as fruit, vegetables, and legumes.