---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Nutrition
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

In most countries, *nutritionist *is a generic term for someone who provides nutritional advice. Nutritionists are not necessarily licensed healthcare professionals and certainly should not portray themselves as such. Nutritionists may be found working in public health organizations, schools, health and fitness centers, weight-loss clinics or in a private practice. Some countries, including the United States, leave it up to consumers to do their due diligence and investigate the origin of the training nutritionists have received and which credentials make them qualified to provide nutritional advice.

The scope of practice for fitness professionals lies primarily within two areas: the field of physical assessment and the development of an appropriate exercise training program based on a client’s goals and abilities. However, nutrition is an important component in the success of this program. Therefore, although it is not strictly within the scope of practice for Certified Personal Trainers to provide specific nutrition prescriptions or dietary counseling to clients (unless the fitness professional also holds a nutrition credential listed in Table 9-1), they may provide education to clients on basic nutrition strategies and direct them to appropriate resources to help support their body composition, training, and/or performance goals.

For example, fitness professionals can inform and guide clients on of the role of nutrients in health and exercise. Fitness professionals may also help clients identify the dietary choices that may be helping or hindering their progress, guide them toward more appropriate food choices, and provide them with accountability and support during their training and implementation of any dietary changes. 

# TRY THIS

The following example offers two scenarios in which a fitness professional is being asked for nutrition guidance. In each case, decide if the fitness professional is acting within their scope of practice.

**Scenario 1**

James is a Certified Personal Trainer at a local gym; he has a new client (Julie) this morning. She is trying to lose 15 lb (6.8 kg) and build some muscle mass over the next 2 months. During training, Julie and James start to talk about her diet, and she gives James an overview of what she eats daily. James notices that her diet is heavily reliant on fast and processed foods, and she eats limited amounts of fruits and vegetables. At the end of the session, Julie asks James for some diet advice. James knows that he is not a licensed nutrition professional but that he can give her general advice. He explains that he cannot give her specific recommendations but suggests that Julie could include more vegetables and fruit in her diet in place of the fast-foods and processed snacks.

	- Is James within his scope of practice in answering Julie’s question?

**Scenario 2**

Ingrid is a Certified Personal Trainer at a local gym. She has a regular client (Bill) who is a type 2 diabetic. Bill was given permission to start an exercise program and has successfully lost 20 lb (9 kg) since working with Ingrid. Bill now wants to change his diet and eliminate carbohydrates to accelerate his weight loss. Ingrid agrees and suggests that Bill may want to change his eating habits and consume predominantly protein and fat.

	- Is Ingrid within her scope of practice to provide these recommendations to Bill?

**Answers**

	- Yes. James is within his scope of practice. Offering guidance on eating fruits and vegetables is within a Certified Personal Trainer’s scope of practice.

	- No. Ingrid is not practicing within her scope of practice. Bill is a type 2 diabetic and should consult a healthcare professional regarding his diet.