---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 8
lesson_title: Goal-Based Nutrition Strategies
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Goal-Based Nutrition Strategies

Many clients engaging in exercise or sports most often have a weight or performance goal, whether it is fat loss, muscle gain, or improved performance in a sport. The accomplishment of these goals relies on an effective training program and appropriate nutrition strategies that complement each other. Specific recommendations will depend on a client’s individual characteristics: age, height, weight, training and weight history, lifestyle, occupation, and dietary preferences. However, the overall strategy for each type of goal (fat loss, muscle gain, or improved sports performance) may be similar for different clients.

#### CRITICAL

It is outside the scope of practice for fitness professionals to prescribe specific meal plans. If clients request more specific nutritional guidelines to meet their goals, they should be referred to an RD or certified sports nutritionist.

## Fat Loss Strategies

Fat loss requires a net deficit in caloric intake, with the goal of minimizing loss of lean body mass and the adaptive thermogenic response to decrease TDEE. A caloric deficit may be achieved through either a decrease in energy intake, an increase in energy expenditure, or a combination of both (which may be more manageable and sustainable for clients).

### MODIFYING ENERGY INTAKE

Drastically decreasing caloric intake is not advisable due to the associated risks of electrolyte imbalances, inadequate nutrient intake (lack of vitamins and minerals), and the loss of lean muscle mass. However, a moderate caloric reduction (e.g., 500 caloric deficit per day) may be more sustainable and minimize the loss of lean mass while also maintaining adequate caloric intake to fuel training. A moderate caloric deficit may be achieved through various methods as follows:

	- Replacing high-calorie foods with leaner options (e.g., a side salad instead of fries with a sandwich)