---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Nutrition
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Accessing credible nutrition information is not difficult, as long as the following guidelines are considered:

	- What is the source of the information? Is it a testimonial or personal blogpost or a research-based article? Personal testimonials are not necessarily supported by research or science; these should be evaluated for scientific evidence in support of any claims.

	- What qualifications are held by the individuals providing the information? Does credible research support their claims/statements?

	- Is the information supported by additional peer-reviewed research?

	- Has the information been reviewed by other qualified individuals?

### TRAINING TIP

At times, fitness professionals may be asked by clients to provide guidance on an area of nutrition as it relates to a client’s training or goals. Although it may not be within the scope of practice for fitness professionals to provide specific meal plans, they can direct clients to credible and reliable sources for additional nutrition information and, thus, help them avoid the pitfalls of following inappropriate and possibly harmful recommendations that are not based on science or research.

Some sources of credible information include:

	- Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics

	- International Society of Sports Nutrition

	- National Institutes of Health

	- U.S. Department of Agriculture, Nutrition.gov

	- Dietitians of Canada

	- British Nutrition Foundation

	- Nutrition Australia

	- World Health Organization

## Macronutrients

In nutrition, the term **macronutrients **refers to the three energy-yielding nutrients: protein, carbohydrates, and lipids (fat). The term **micronutrients **refers to **vitamins**, **minerals**, and phytonutrients, which are compounds found in plants that provide various health benefits, such as anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. The three macronutrients are energy yielding in that they provide usable energy by cells for various biological processes. Protein and carbohy- drates both provide 4 calories per gram, while lipids provide 9 calories per gram. Micronutrients do not provide usable energy by themselves, but they are important in the regulation of many energy-yielding pathways and metabolic cycle.

**Table 9-3 **lists the three macronutrients, as well as alcohol, with their specific energy contribution in metabolic pathways. An understanding of the macronutrients and their role in diet and exercise can help fitness professionals identify if and how clients’ diets may be affecting their training and guide them to nutrition resources and qualified professionals for assistance in addressing any dietary imbalances.

**TABLE 9-3 The Macronutrients Plus Alcohol**

| Energy-Yielding Nutrient | Energy per Gram |
|---|---|
| Protein | 4 calories |
| Carbohydrate | 4 calories |
| Lipid | 9 calories |
| Alcohol (energy yielding but not considered a macronutrient) | 7 calories |

## Key Terms

**Macronutrients**
Food substances required in large amounts to supply energy; include protein, carbohydrate, and fat.

**Micronutrients**
Vitamins, minerals, and phytonutrients. These are nonenergy yielding nutrients that have important regulatory functions in metabolic pathways.

**Vitamins**
Group of organic compounds required in small quantities in the diet to support growth and metabolic processes.

**Minerals**
Inorganic, natural substances, some of which are essential in human nutrition. There are two kinds of minerals: major minerals (aka, macrominerals) and trace minerals.