---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Carbohydrates
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
In some cases, such as posttraining and in sports where there is a need for rapid glycogen replenishment, it appears more beneficial to use easily digestible carbohydrate sources, such as simple sugars in sports rehydration drinks and low-fiber carbohydrates. **Glycemic index (GI) **and **glycemic load (GL) **are two measurements that are often used to indicate the speed and the extent to which a carbohydrate source raises blood sugar levels.

### GLYCEMIC INDEX (GI)

The GI is a measure of how quickly a carbohydrate will raise an individual’s glucose levels when consumed on its own. On the GI scale, all carbohydrates are compared to glucose, which is given a GI value of 100 (Harvard Medical School, 2015) (**Table ****9-11**). Carbohydrates that are higher on the GI scale, given a value of 70 or higher, can contribute to a rapid rise in blood sugar levels, whereas foods lower on the GI scale can lead to a much slower response. Simple carbohydrates, such as table sugar, juice, sweetened soda, and candy, are generally higher on the GI scale, whereas most complex carbohydrates and high-fiber foods (such as whole grains, legumes, and vegetables) are much lower. Higher GI foods may be helpful for athletes during pretraining and posttraining periods. Easily digestible carbohydrates provide a ready source of fuel when taken immediately prior to training, and in the posttraining period, they provide immediate glucose for rapid glycogen replenishment. 

**TABLE 9-11 Glycemic Index**

| Category | Examples |
|---|---|
| Low GI foods (55 or less) | Most non-starchy vegetables and whole grains, beans, cow’s milk |
| Medium GI foods (56–69) | Macaroni and cheese, raisins, hamburger bun, pineapple, banana |
| High GI foods (70 or above) | Glucose, hard candy, instant rice, sports drinks |
| Data from Burke et al., 2011. |

## Key Terms

**Glycemic index (GI)**
Number (0–100) assigned to a food source that represents the rise in blood sugar after consuming the food.

**Glycemic load (GL)**
Similar to glycemic index but takes into account the amount of food (carbohydrate) eaten.