---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction and Preparticipation Health Screening
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
The PAR-Q+ and preparticipation process reflects these health indicators:

	- An individual’s current level of physical activity

	- Presence of signs or symptoms and/or known cardiovascular, pulmonary (respiratory), renal (kidney), or metabolic disease (e.g., diabetes)

	- Desired exercise intensity (light, moderate, vigorous)

# CRITICAL

Fitness professionals should continue to consult with medical professionals for any questions pertaining to disease or signs and symptoms found in their client’s PAR-Q+.

The criteria also provide general recommendations for medical clearance rather than a specific need for medical exams. This allows for greater discretion to the Certified Personal Trainer in the decision-making process, because exercise testing is not a uniformly recommended screening process for all individuals initiating an exercise program.

Part one of the questionnaire consists of seven questions. If the client answers no to all seven questions, then the survey is considered complete (**Figure 11-1**). However, if the client answers yes to any of the initial seven questions, they must complete part two of the survey (available in Appendix A).

# CRITICAL

The PAR-Q+ has always been recognized as a minimal yet safe pre-exercise screening measure for low-to-moderate, but not vigorous, exercise training (Bredin et al., 2013). While the seven questions are simple to administer, its simplicity was also problematic as it offered little opportunity for interpretation of the questions asked. Unfortunately, this resulted in far too many individuals not being cleared for participation and being referred unnecessarily to their doctors for medical clearance. For example, an individual diagnosed with any pulmonary diseases (e.g., asthma) was automatically referred to their medical provider for clearance before initiating an exercise or physical activity program. In reality, these diseases do not appear to increase the risks of fatal or nonfatal cardiovascular complications during or immediately following exercise (Bredin et al., 2013).

# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

The current PAR-Q+ includes additional follow-up questions to better guide participation recommendations that were not part of the original PAR-Q for individuals who indicated yes on one or more questions. These questions aim to reduce **false-positive screenings**, reduce barriers to exercise initiation, and help customize pre-exercise recommendations based on relevant medical history and symptomology. This second section or follow-up inquiry consists of 10 questions, divided into multiple parts, focused on identifying signs and symptoms of any significant cardiovascular, pulmonary, or metabolic condition. Remember that signs or symptoms must be interpreted by a qualified professional within the clinical context in which they appear; Certified Personal Trainers are not qualified to make any such diagnosis. For example, if an individual complains of some occasional chest pain and tightness, the fitness professional should not make any diagnosis, assumptions, or deductions. To respect scope of practice, the fitness professional should encourage the individual to consult with their own medical provider.

## Key Terms

**False-positive screenings**
A screening where the results of the health risk assessment might indicate a need for medical clearance, when one is in fact not needed.