---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Cardiorespiratory Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
This measurement (VT2) is a critical measurement of athletic performance, because the intensity immediately below this level represents the exercise pace that an endurance athlete can sustain throughout their race or training to attain their best performance.

**VT2 Test Considerations**

	- VT2 testing is only recommended for individuals with performance goals given the purpose, nature, and intensity required for measuring this physiological marker.

	- While several standardized field tests exist (e.g., 60-minute ride, 30- or 60-minute runs), they demand a lot of time and are tedious to administer.

	- A modified test, such as a 20-minute run or ride test protocol, provides a viable alternative, which is easier to conduct than the standardized 30- or 60-minute protocols.

	- The test requires the subject to maintain their highest-sustainable pace for 20 minutes and the fitness professional to record the client’s heart rate and marker of performance (e.g., RPE, speed, wattage) over the last 5 minutes.

**VT2 Test Instructions**

	- Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions, and allow adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery prior to conducting the test.

	- To start, increase the intensity to a predetermined pace. Some careful programming is required to determine this pace, but allow for some minor adjustments as needed during the first few minutes of the bout. Remember that the client will need to hold this pace for 20 minutes; it should be the most intense pace they can safely handle.

	- Record the individual’s heart rate and marker of performance (e.g., speed, wattage, RPE) during the last 5 minutes of the bout.

	- Use the average heart rates collected over the last 5 minutes, then correct that number by 95% to estimate the client’s VT2. This 5% correction is needed because a 20-minute pace is usually more intense than when a client is performing a 30- to 60-minute test.

#### EXAMPLE VT2 TEST

As an example, Amy starts her test at 8.5 mph, then adjusts it to 8.8 mph within the first 3 minutes and sustains this pace for the remainder of the run. Her heart rate responses are as follows:

	- Minute 16: HR = 176 bpm

	- Minute 17: HR = 178 bpm

	- Minute 18: HR = 177 bpm

	- Minute 19: HR = 179 bpm

	- Minute 20: HR = 179 bpm

Amy’s average HR = 177.8 bpm × 0.95 = 168.9 bpm, or 169 when rounded up.