---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction and Preparticipation Health Screening
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
An HHQ typically contains the following information about a client, which is considered private and confidential:

	- Age

	- Gender

	- Height

	- Weight

	- Physician’s name and contact information

	- Emergency contact information

##### CRITICAL

Any information collected about an individual during the assessment process cannot be shared without written consent from that individual; further, the information must be securely stored away from other co-workers and the public.

The questions asked within an HHQ can vary significantly, but they generally collect information about a client’s lifestyle habits, including exercise, diet, sleep, stress, occupation, and recreational pursuits. In addition, the questionnaire will include questions about medical history, including past injuries, past surgeries, chronic diseases, and medication.

### LIFESTYLE HABITS

Understanding a client’s lifestyle is an important step before designing an exercise program. This information provides context for how a client eats, works, sleeps, and spends leisure activity. From this information, fitness professionals will be better equipped to design individualized exercise programs for their clients.

#### EXERCISE HABITS

Collecting exercise and physical activity information will provide an indication of a client’s fitness level. Within this area, the fitness professional should gather information on whether or not the individual is currently active and participating in any regular exercise or physical activity. If so, it’s important to know details regarding the activity: length of time (i.e., history), the nature or type, frequency, duration, and intensity.

Fitness professionals should inquire about their client’s preferred exercise activities, such as running, weight lifting, group exercise, and others. These questions will provide opportunities to learn more about an individual’s preferences and desires, which can become relevant during exercise programming. In addition, it is important to inquire about a client’s general thoughts and impressions regarding fitness testing and evaluations.

Discussions inquiring about a client’s willingness to participate in exercise programs can prove useful when developing exercise regimens. For example, a fitness professional can ask a client to rank the importance of a list of outcomes using a scale of 0 to 10, with 0 being unimportant and 10 being very important. The list of outcomes can include many items like losing weight, improving overall health, increasing muscle mass, or enhancing sports performance.

#### DIETARY HABITS

While the topic of nutrition cannot be understated, considering the depth and breadth of nutritional information that can be collected, the initially gathered information should be more generalized and qualitative in nature.