---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
Consequently, submaximal tests are frequently used because they are more practical and easier to administer. These tests range from simple, short-duration step tests to more challenging distance runs, but they are limited in their capacity to accurately provide individualized estimates of overall fitness or of the efficiency of a client’s unique metabolism. Subsequently, cardiorespiratory tests aimed at measuring unique metabolic markers have been developed to provide more personalized estimates of aerobic efficiency and athletic performance. Because ventilation provides a good  indication of metabolism within the body, the talk test for VT1 has been validated as a good estimate of aerobic efficiency. The measurement of VT2 is a good estimate of one’s capacity to sustain high-intensity work for individuals with performance-centric goals.

### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- The general purposes of conducting physiological assessments are to collect baseline data to help fitness professionals develop personalized exercise programs.

	- The PAR-Q+ is considered an appropriate minimal screening tool for conducting an HRA.

	- Fitness professionals should also gather additional information, through the use of an HHQ, that may prove useful in selecting fitness assessments, designing exercise programs, and monitoring progress.

	- An HHQ includes information about a client’s medical history (e.g., injuries, surgeries, medications, and chronic disease) and lifestyle habits (e.g., exercise, diet, sleep, stress, and occupation).

	- Resting and exercising heart rate and blood pressure responses provide valuable information pertaining to health risks and training adaptations.

	- There are many anatomical locations that can be used to measure a client’s RHR. However, for accuracy, safety, and ease of administering, NASM recommends that fitness professionals measure a client’s radial pulse.

	- Blood pressure (BP) is defined as the outward pressure exerted by blood on the arterial walls. BP scores are important because higher scores indicate greater risks for developing cardiovascular disease, which can become life-threatening. A normal BP reading is less than 120/80 mm Hg.

	- Anthropometry is the field of study of the measurement of living humans for purposes of understanding physical variation in size, weight, and proportion.

	- Many different anthropometric measures exist, including body fat assessments, BMI, and circumference measurements. Anthropometric measurements provide useful information related to predicting a client’s risk for mortality and morbidity.

	- There are many methods for measuring a client’s body fat percentage, including underwater weighing, skinfold measurements, and bioelectrical impedance analysis. While all methods are valid, for ease of use, bioelectrical impedance is arguably the most popular method used in fitness facilities.

	- Cardiorespiratory assessments help the fitness professional identify safe and effective starting exercise intensities as well as appropriate modes of cardiorespiratory exercise for clients. Examples of cardiorespiratory assessments include VO~2max~ testing, the YMCA 3-minute step test, the Rockport walk test, and the 1.5 mile run test.

	- VO~2max~ testing is considered the gold standard for identifying a client’s level of cardiorespiratory fitness, but it requires specialized equipment and training to conduct. In addition, it requires the client to exert maximal effort. Consequently, this test is not commonly used outside of exercise laboratories or medical facilities.