---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

Conducting health risk and physiological assessments are an integral part of personal training. While the timing, relevance, and appropriateness of any physiological assessment should be considered, it is both the legal and ethical responsibility of a Certified Personal Trainer to always conduct an HRA prior to having a client initiate an exercise program.

An updated HRA in the form of the PAR-Q+ allows a fitness professional to adequately screen a participant to determine if they are ready for exercise or if the need for referral to a more qualified medical professional is necessary.

Once an individual is cleared for participation, there are numerous assessments that can be effectively used to establish baseline levels for program design. In this chapter, the protocols for the fundamental assessments of heart rate and blood pressure were introduced, as were protocols for evaluating anthropometric parameters and cardiorespiratory fitness. In addition, recent research and ideas have paved the way for assessments focused on an individual’s unique metabolism. These measures, VT1 and VT2, allow the fitness professional to customize cardiorespiratory programs based on the client’s unique level of fitness.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

Structured exercise and physical activity can reduce an individual’s risk for mortality and morbidity while also providing many physiological, emotional, and cognitive benefits. Many of these benefits can be attained from various intensities of exercise (e.g., from light to moderate to vigorous intensities), but any intensity of exercise may hold some risk for harm. Therefore, all new exercisers, especially those planning to participate in more moderate-to-vigorous intensities of exercise, should be appropriately screened with some form of an HRA to evaluate the benefits versus the risks of participation. The PAR-Q+ is considered an appropriate minimal screening tool. Additional information collected about a new client through an HHQ provides the fitness professional with relevant information to guide and assist with program design. The information collected from an HHQ provides additional data about a client’s lifestyle habits and medical history.

When clients are cleared for participation, a fitness professional may choose to conduct physiological assessments that establish baseline levels from which exercise programs can be monitored. The assessments selected should always consider relevance, appropriateness, validity, reliability, and sequence to ensure the best possible outcomes. Furthermore, fitness professionals need to be very aware of all exercise test termination criteria during any test that involves physical exertion, to ensure client safety.

Heart rate is a valid indicator of work intensity or stress, both at rest and during exercise; it can also provide valuable feedback regarding cardiovascular adaptations to exercise over time. Blood pressure is another important cardiovascular measurement that reflects the outward force exerted by blood on the vessel walls. Although exercise normally elevates blood pressure responses, higher resting scores are associated with greater risks for developing cardiovascular disease, which can become life-threatening.

Anthropometric measurements represent another type of commonly collected information that can quantify body composition and body shape via techniques like body fat assessment, BMI, or circumference measurements; each measurement can provide valuable health estimates of mortality and morbidity. Although BMI and circumference measurements provide estimates of body shape, they are poor predictors of a person’s body fat percentage. Skinfold measurements and hydrostatic (underwater) weighing are both considered valid estimators of body composition, but they do require greater practitioner expertise (skill) and the need for expensive equipment, respectively. Therefore, other techniques, such as BIA, are becoming more popular and commonplace today, since they are more cost-effective and require less practitioner expertise.

Cardiorespiratory fitness evaluates a client’s capacity for performing work and can be assessed using multiple formats. Although the VO2max test is the most valid marker of cardiorespiratory fitness, direct measurements involve some risk of harm associated with high intensities of physical work, great expenses associated with gas analyzers, and the demand for professional expertise on the part of the practitioner to administer and interpret these tests.