---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction and Preparticipation Health Screening
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
The effect of injuries on the functioning of the human body is well documented, especially with regard to the following injuries:

	- Ankle sprains. These have been shown to decrease muscle activation of the gluteus medius and gluteus maximus muscles. In turn, this can lead to poor control of the lower extremities during many functional activities, which can eventually lead to injury  (Bullock-Saxton, 1994; Friel et al., 2006).

	- Knee injuries involving ligaments. A knee injury can cause a decrease in activation to muscles that stabilize the patella (kneecap) and lead to further injury. Noncontact knee injuries are often the result of ankle or hip dysfunction because the knee is caught between the ankle and the hip. If the ankle or hip joint begins to function improperly, this results in altered movement and force distribution of the knee. Over time, this can lead to further injury (Fong et al., 2011; Shultz et al., 2015).

	- Low-back injuries. These injuries can cause decreased activation to stabilizing muscles of the core, resulting in poor stabilization of the spine. This can further lead to dysfunction and pain (Hides et al., 2011; Stuber et al., 2014).

	- Shoulder injuries. These injuries cause altered muscle activation of the rotator cuff muscles, which can lead to instability of the shoulder joint during functional activities (Gombera & Sekiya, 2014; Yanagawa et al., 2008).

	- Other injuries. Additional injuries can include (but are not limited to) repetitive hamstring strains, groin strains, patellar tendonitis (jumper’s knee), plantar fasciitis (pain in the heel and bottom of the foot), shin splints, biceps tendonitis (shoulder pain), and headaches.

#### PAST SURGERIES

Surgical procedures create trauma for the body. These procedures may produce effects similar to injuries on the functioning of the human body and the safety and efficacy of exercise. Fitness professionals frequently interact with clients who have experienced some of the following more common surgical procedures:

	- Foot and ankle surgery

	- Knee surgery

	- Back surgery

	- Shoulder surgery

	- Caesarean section for birth (cutting through the abdominal wall to deliver a baby)

	- Appendectomy (cutting through the abdominal wall to remove the appendix)

#### CHRONIC DISEASE

The risk of chronic disease increases dramatically in those individuals who are physically inactive (Booth et al., 2017). Chronic diseases can include the following:

	- Cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, coronary artery disease, or congestive heart failure

	- Hypertension (high blood pressure)

	- High cholesterol or other blood lipid disorders

	- Stroke or peripheral artery disease

	- Lung or breathing problems

	- Obesity

	- Diabetes mellitus

	- Cancer