---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessment
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Postural,  Movement, and Performance  Assessments

Posture, movement, and performance assessments are an integral part of the intake process for all clients and will assist the fitness professional in developing customized fitness programs to enhance a client’s well-being. **Static posture** is the positioning of the musculoskeletal system while the body is standing still, whereas a person’s **dynamic posture** represents what happens to that alignment when the body is in motion. Functional movement is the means by which individuals can perform activities ranging from activities of daily living to occupational tasks to sports and recreational enjoyment. It is important that fitness professionals are proficient at recognizing **optimal movement** based on a foundation of anatomy and kinesiology. Further, understanding optimal postural alignment and movement strategies allows fitness professionals to identify **movement impairments** by conducting **movement assessments**, which can indicate possible **muscle imbalances** or **mobility **limitations. In addition, **performance assessments** can be used to assess a client’s power, strength, and muscular endurance, which are necessary for athletic endeavors. This chapter will review the rationale for posture, movement, and performance assessments; present how to perform these assessments; and discuss how to implement these assessments for the general population. In addition, modifications are provided in this chapter for several special populations.

## Key Terms

**Static posture**
The positioning of the musculoskeletal system while the body is motionless.

**Dynamic posture**
Alignment of the body while in motion.

**Optimal movement**
Moving in a biomechanically efficient manner that maximizes muscle recruitment and minimizes risk of injury.

**Movement impairments**
Abnormal movement patterns that can indicate possible muscle imbalances or mobility limitation.

**Movement assessment**
An assessment of a client’s movement patterns and postural alignment during movement or activity; also known as a dynamic postural assessment.

**Muscle imbalance**
When muscles on each side of a joint have altered length-tension relationships.

**Mobility**
Optimal flexibility and joint range of motion; ability to move freely.

**Performance assessment**
Assessments used to measure overall strength, muscular endurance, power, and agility.