---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Performance Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
## Lower Extremity Functional Test

The** lower extremity functional test (LEFT)** is designed to test lateral speed and agility (**Figure 12-25**). The LEFT is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals and seeking to assess speed and agility. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.

**LEFT Position**

	- Two cones are spaced 10 yards (9.1 meters) apart on a nonslip surface.

	- The client should stand in a ready position behind cone one.

**LEFT Movement**

	- The client should complete the following sequence as quickly as possible.

		- Forward sprint to cone two.

		- Backpedal to cone one.

		- Side shuffle to cone two.

		- Side shuffle to cone one.

		- Carioca to cone two.

		- Carioca to cone one.

		- Forward sprint to cone two.

	- The timer should start at the first movement and end when the client runs past the final cone.

	- The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to measure progress.

## 40-Yard Dash Assessment

The **40-yard dash assessment** is designed to test reaction capabilities, acceleration, and maximal sprinting speed (**Figure 12-26**). The 40-yard dash assessment is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients.

## Key Terms

**Lower extremity functional test (LEFT)**
A performance assessment designed to test lateral speed and agility.

## Images

**Figure 12-25: Lower extremity functional test**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF25.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 12-25: ). The LEFT is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals and seeking to assess speed and agility. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.**
Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_el3_asses_left_test.jpeg

**Figure 12-2640: -yard dash assessment**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF26.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533