---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Static Posture Assessment
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
**Posterior View** (**Figure 12-4**)

	- Foot/ankle: Heels are straight and parallel; Achilles tendon is vertical; calcaneus (heel bone) not excessively everted; weight is equally balanced between right and left sides

	- Knees: Neutral position, not in valgus or varus

	- LPHC: Pelvis is level; not rotated or hiked on one side

	- Shoulders/scapulae: Level; not elevated or protracted

	- Head: Neutral position; neither tilted nor rotated

Note: An imaginary line should begin between the feet, extending upward between the lower extremities, through the midline of the pelvis, and bisecting the trunk and skull. When examining exclusively the foot and ankle, an imaginary line should begin at the midline of the calcaneus (heel bone), extending upward along the Achilles tendon. The Achilles tendon should be vertical.

## Common Distortion Patterns

How a client presents in static stance is, in a sense, a roadmap of how they have been using their body with time. Interestingly, the body tends to compensate in observable patterns, causing predictable alterations in muscle function. For example, presentation of a forward head (head juts forward) and protracted (rounded) shoulders in static posture will typically be related to dysfunction of the muscles that surround the shoulder and neck areas and predictable patterns of muscle imbalance.

### THREE DISTORTION PATTERNS

Basic compensatory patterns were studied and described by Janda (2002) in the early 1970s. It is not to say that other compensations do not occur; he simply suggested that there was a cascading effect of deviations in static posture that would, more likely than not, present themselves in a particular pattern.

## Images

**Figure 12-4: Kinetic Chain Checkpoint Posterior View**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF04_Art.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533