---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Performance Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals seeking to assess straight-ahead sprinting speed. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.

**40-Yard Dash Assessment Position**

	- Two cones are spaced 40 yards (36.6 meters) apart or use an American football field with clearly indicated yard lines.

	- The client should stand in a ready position behind cone one.

**40-Yard Dash Assessment Movement**

	- The client should sprint as quickly as possible to the 40-yard marker.

	- The timer should start at the first movement and end when the client hits the 40-yard mark.

	- The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to measure progress.

## Pro Shuttle Assessment

The **pro shuttle (5-10-5) assessment** is designed to assess acceleration, deceleration, agility, and control (**Figure 12-27**). This test is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals seeking to assess agility and sprinting speed. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.

**Pro Shuttle Assessment Position**

	- Two cones are spaced 10 yards (9.1 meters) apart, with a third cone in the middle (5 yards from other cones).

	- The client should stand in a ready position next to the middle cone.

	- The timer should stand facing the middle cone.

**Pro Shuttle Test Movement**

	- The client should sprint as quickly as possible in the following pattern:

		- Cone one to cone two

		- Cone two to cone three

		- Cone three to cone one

	- The timer should start at the first movement and end when the client passes the middle cone at the end of the sprint pattern.

	- The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to measure progress.

## Key Terms

**40-yard dash assessment**
A performance assessment designed to test reaction capabilities, acceleration, and maximal speed.

**Pro shuttle (5-10-5) assessment**
A performance assessment designed to test lateral acceleration, deceleration, agility, and control.

## Images

**Figure 12-27: ). This test is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals seeking to assess agility and sprinting speed. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.**
Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_el3_asses_40_yard_dash.jpeg

**Figure 12-27: Pro shuttle (5-10-5) assessment**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF27.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 12-27: ). This test is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients. Generally speaking, Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals seeking to assess agility and sprinting speed. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal performance testing.**
Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_el3_asses_5_10_5_test.jpeg