---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Implementing the Fitness Assessment
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
### PRENATAL CLIENTS

The types of assessments performed for prenatal clients depend on their goals and stage of pregnancy. The most important assessment for a prenatal client is a preparticipation health screening. Medical clearance, prior to exercise, by the client’s physician is also recommended. It is presumably safe to perform most assessments with prenatal clients in their first trimester. However, precautions must be made for clients in their second and third trimesters. Performance assessments are likely not necessary for prenatal clients, unless the client is an athlete with medical clearance to continue vigorous exercise. In all cases, **prone **and **supine **positions should be avoided for prenatal clients in their second and third trimesters; instead, opt for seated or standing assessments. Assessment considerations for prenatal clients include the following:

	- Thorough preparticipation health screening and medical clearance should be obtained prior to further testing.

	- Assumptions about a prenatal client’s ability should be avoided, and instead, results from postural and movement screenings should be used to help determine her functional status.

	- The prenatal client’s concerns about movements or activities should be noted, and she should not be forced into any assessments that she is not comfortable with.

	- Movements that require a prenatal client to get on and off the ground should be limited.

	- The assessment process should start conservatively and then progress to more challenging movements based on the prenatal client’s goals and abilities.

	- Prone and supine positions should be avoided for prenatal clients in their second and third trimesters.

Assessment modification options for prenatal clients include the following:

	- The overhead squat may need to be modified with a reduced squat depth, especially for clients in their second or third trimesters.

	- Skipping the single-leg squat assessment is recommended for prenatal clients.

	- Pushing and pulling assessments should be performed in a standing position or with the use of machines for improved stability and comfort.

## Key Terms

**Prone**
Lying facedown.

**Supine**
Lying faceup.