---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessment
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
## Importance of Posture

Optimal posture allows for an individual’s body to be aligned in a manner that decreases stress on bodily tissues and joints, whether in seated, standing, or lying positions. However, due to a lack of postural awareness as well as work environments that require excessive sitting, many individuals suffer from poor posture (Gupta et al., 2015; Park et al., 2018). This can negatively affect the length-tension of muscles and increase stress on the body throughout the day. As a result, it is important for the fitness professional to have confidence in evaluating static standing posture, which will also serve as the foundation for movement assessments (discussed later in this chapter).

When the Certified Personal Trainer works with a client for the first time, it is a good idea to first gain an understanding of their client’s static posture. Many of the postural deviations that are detected in a static postural assessment will also occur during various movement assessments. For example, if the client presents with a flattened arch of the foot, also known as **pes planus**, in static posture, they will typically also display altered foot and ankle mechanics during various movement assessments. When impairments are identified across multiple assessments, this is a good indication that exercise programming should address these issues.

## Muscle Imbalances

Muscle imbalances are alterations in the lengths of muscles surrounding a joint (**Figure 12-1**) in which some are **overactive **(forcing compensation to occur) and others may be **underactive **(allowing for the compensation to occur; Page et al., 2010; Sueki et al., 2013). In other words, muscle imbalance is a condition in which there is a lack of balance between muscles surrounding a joint (Mersmann et al., 2017). Muscle imbalance can be caused by a variety of mechanisms, including (but not limited to) repetitive movement, sedentary lifestyle, and trauma.

### GETTING TECHNICAL

The terms *overactive *and *underactive *are used in this text to refer to the activity level of a muscle relative to another muscle or muscle group, not necessarily to its own normal functional capacity. When a muscle is overactive, it is in a state of elevated neural activity (compared to its antagonist muscle), which causes the muscle to be held in a chronic state of contraction. When a muscle is underactive, it is in a state of inhibited neural drive (compared to its antagonist muscle). This can cause the muscle’s functional antagonist to pull it into a chronically elongated state.

## Key Terms

**Pes planus**
Collapsed arch of the foot; also known as flat feet.

**Overactive**
When elevated neural drive causes a muscle to be held in a chronic state of contraction.

**Underactive**
When a muscle is experiencing neural inhibition and limited neuromuscular recruitment.

## Images

**Figure 12-1: Muscle imbalance**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533