---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Observing Dynamic Posture
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
This assessment also requires much more strength than the overhead squat, which typically limits squat depth and stability. However, if the fitness professional plans to program single-leg exercises, it is a good idea to assess this pattern of movement first. As usual, fitness professionals should remember to only use this test if clients are stable enough to avoid falling or injuring themselves.

## Pushing Assessment

The **pushing assessment** is an assessment that challenges the upper extremities and trunk during a pushing movement. This type of assessment can be completed prior to a workout session or as an integrated part of the actual programming. The pushing assessment evaluates scapular and shoulder mechanics and stability of the LPHC, cervical spine, and head. The fitness professional should carefully evaluate all repetitions, because the client may demonstrate movement impairments as they become fatigued during the assessment.

### Pushing Assessment Starting Position (Figure 12-15)

	- The client should stand in a narrow, split stance with the toes pointing forward and handles in each hand.

	- The fitness professional should choose a resistance that will challenge (but not exhaust) the client while executing 10 repetitions.

If the client is not able to perform a standing chest press in a narrow, split stance, use one of the following modifications:

	- Option 1: The client stands in a wider split stance. This testing position still assesses the upper extremity and cervical spine and head, but it decreases the challenge to the LPHC and the client’s balance.

	- Option 2: The client performs a pushing movement seated in a machine.

## Key Terms

**Pushing assessment**
An assessment that challenges the upper extremities and trunk during a pushing movement to identify movement impairments and potential muscle imbalances.

## Images

**Figure 12-15: )**
Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_el3_asses_sl_squat_assessment.jpeg

**Figure 12-15: Pushing assessment, starting position**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF15.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 12-16: Pushing assessment, movement**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF16.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533