---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Integrated Training Principles
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Acute Variables of Training

**Acute variables**, also known as exercise training variables, determine the amount of stress placed on the body and ultimately the physical adaptations that occur, such as increased strength, endurance, weight loss, or muscle gain. Acute variables can be viewed as all the building blocks that are used to design an exercise program, which include repetitions, sets, training intensity, repetition tempo, rest intervals, training volume, training frequency, training duration, exercise selection, and exercise order.

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

A **repetition** is one complete movement of an exercise. A **set** is a group of consecutive repetitions. **Training intensity** is an individual’s level of effort compared with their maximal effort, which is usually expressed as a percentage. A **rest interval** is the time interval that is given between each set (Miranda et al., 2007). **Training volume** is the sum of the repetitions performed in a given set during each training session multiplied by the resistance used. Refer to Chapter 20 for a more detailed discussion of acute variables.

Acute variables are the most fundamental components of an integrated training program because they determine the amount of stress placed on the body during an exercise session. Properly manipulating acute variables will help the fitness professional elicit optimal performance from their clients while reducing the risk of injury (Arazi et al., 2015; Brigatto et al., 2019; Kraemer & Ratamess, 2004; Schoenfeld et al., 2016a).

## Training Based on Assessment Results

Programming efforts should focus on the assessments conducted by the fitness professional prior to their client’s initial workout. Appropriately conducted assessments are needed to develop a baseline value for different exercises that will be completed in the exercise program. Also, the detection of muscle imbalances, postural abnormalities, and other health concerns can reveal necessary information about a potential client. The fitness professional can then gain an accurate portrayal of the client to develop the proper movement patterns for the new exercise program.

Although this seems easy, gathering data from a fitness assessment and then accurately using that data to design exercise programs can be a difficult task.

## Key Terms

**Acute variables**
Important components that specify how each exercise is to be performed; also known as exercise training variables.

**Repetition**
One complete movement of an exercise.

**Set**
A group of consecutive repetitions.

**Training intensity**
An individual’s level of effort compared with his or her maximal effort, which is usually expressed as a percentage.

**Rest interval**
The time taken to recuperate between sets.

**Training volume**
The sum of the repetitions performed in a given set during each training session, multiplied by the resistance used.