---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# The Optimum Performance Training® Model

Exercise training programs are largely based on the past experiences of those designing them. For example, training programs designed by those with backgrounds in bodybuilding, powerlifting, or Olympic weightlifting tend to vary considerably from programs designed by those with experience in endurance training or group exercise, such as aerobics, dance, or Pilates. Although experience is always an important quality to have in any field, including personal training, it is not the only qualification; in some cases, it is not even the most important qualification held by a Certified Personal Trainer. Designing safe and effective exercise training programs requires a variety of skills, including knowledge of anatomy, physiology, and human movement; the ability to communicate effectively with clients; and experience in working with diverse populations.

To help Certified Personal Trainers design safe and effective training programs based on the client’s individual needs, NASM recommends using a structured, scientifically based program design model. The training program should be a methodical approach to improve physical and performance adaptations. The best way to achieve consistent, superior results is to follow a structured, periodized training program (Rhea et al., 2003; Williams et al., 2017). Evidence also exists that an integrated program that includes flexibility; core; balance; plyometric; speed, agility, and quickness; resistance; and cardiorespiratory training can decrease injury and improve performance (Distefano et al., 2013).

As such, NASM created an evidenced-based training system known as the Optimum Performance Training (OPT) model. The OPT model was conceptualized as a training program for a society that has more structural imbalances and susceptibility to injury than ever before. It is a process of programming that systematically progresses any client to any fitness or sport-performance goal. The OPT model is based on the scientific rationale of human movement science and uses the principles of integrated training discussed throughout this chapter.

The OPT model is divided into three different levels of training—stabilization, strength, and power (**Figure 13-3**), which are subdivided into five phases. It is imperative that fitness professionals understand the scientific rationale behind each level and each individual phase of training so they can properly use the OPT model.

## Images

**Figure 13-3: OPT model**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH13_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533