---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### PHASE 3 MUSCULAR DEVELOPMENT TRAINING

Phase 3 Muscular Development Training is designed for individuals who have the goal of maximal muscle growth (such as bodybuilders). This phase of training can use a variety of resistance training exercises and methods to elicit a maximal response in muscle growth. This form of training can also benefit those seeking to lose body fat while maintaining lean muscle mass (Cava et al., 2017). Because the goal of this phase of training is primarily muscular hypertrophy, the fitness professional will want to increase the volume (lots of sets) and intensity (using moderate to heavy weight) of the program. This phase is optional depending on the goals of the client, because some clients do not wish to achieve high levels of muscular growth, such as endurance athletes. However, this phase is very popular among fitness enthusiasts seeking to reduce body fat and improve muscle tone.

### PHASE 4 MAXIMAL STRENGTH TRAINING

Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training works toward the goal of maximal prime mover strength by lifting heavy loads. In other words, in this phase of training the client will opt for exclusively heavy weights when performing resistance training exercises. This phase of training is common for strength athletes, such as those who compete in powerlifting or strongman competitions and others who require maximal strength (i.e., shot-putters, rugby athletes, American football linemen).

Because the goal is to increase maximal strength capabilities, individuals must be accustomed to resistance training. This is an advanced form of exercise that is optional, depending on the goals of the client.

## Power

The power level of training should only be entered after successful completion of the stabilization and strength levels—unless the client is well-conditioned, exhibits adequate joint and core stability, and is familiar with power forms of exercise. This level of training emphasizes the development of speed and power. This is achieved through one phase of training simply named Phase 5 Power Training.

### PHASE 5 POWER TRAINING

The goal of Phase 5 Power Training is to increase maximal strength and **rate of force production**. This phase of training is important for improving velocity of movement and athleticism. The premise behind this phase of training is the execution of a traditional strength exercise (with a heavy load) superset with a power-focused (high-velocity) exercise of similar joint dynamics (**Table 13-10**). This form of training, also known as complex training, has been shown to improve sprint and vertical jump performance (Freitas et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019).

**TABLE 13-10 Phase 5 Example Supersets**

| Body Part | Strength-Focused Exercise | Power-Focused Exercise |
|---|---|---|
| Chest | Bench press | Medicine ball chest pass |
| Back | Lat pulldown | Medicine ball soccer throw |
| Shoulders | Dumbbell shoulder press | Front medicine ball oblique throw |
| Leg | Barbell squat | Squat jump |

## Key Terms

**Rate of force production**
Ability of muscles to exert maximal force output in a minimal amount of time.