---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Stabilization

The first level of training in the OPT model focuses on two main adaptations: improving movement patterns and enhancing stabilization. By doing so, it prepares the body for the demands of higher levels of training that may follow. This period is crucial for all beginners (Saeterbakken et al., 2016). It is also necessary to cycle back through this level after periods of strength and power training to maintain a high degree of core and joint stability. In addition, it allows the body to actively rest from more intense bouts of training. The focus of stabilization training includes the following goals:

	- Improving movement patterns and exercise technique

	- Improving muscle imbalances

	- Improving joint ROM and flexibility

	- Improving stabilization of the core musculature and peripheral joints

	- Preventing tissue overload by preparing muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joints for the upcoming imposed demands of training

	- Improving overall cardiorespiratory conditioning

The stabilization level of training in the OPT model consists of one phase of training: Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training.

### PHASE 1 STABILIZATION ENDURANCE TRAINING

Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training is designed to teach optimal movement patterns (e.g., pushing, pulling, pressing, squatting, hip hinging) and to help clients become familiar with various modes of exercise. In addition, this phase of training creates optimal levels of joint and core stabilization and postural control. Although this phase is the first phase of training in the OPT model, it will also be important to cycle back through this phase of training between periods of higher-intensity training seen in Phases 2 through 5. This will ensure proper recovery while maintaining high levels of stability.

Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training focuses on exercises and movements that enhance muscular endurance, joint ROM, joint and core stability, and muscular coordination. It requires slow and controlled movements, relatively light loads, and meticulous attention to proper posture and exercise technique.

In the early implementation of this phase, fitness professionals should focus a great deal of energy on honing and perfecting proper movement patterns and introducing clients to a variety of exercise modalities. The goal is to improve the client’s ability to move in a biomechanically correct manner to reduce the risk of injury, which may have the added benefit of increasing client adherence to the exercise program. Clients are more likely to stick with an exercise program if they feel confident in their abilities.

Once movement patterns have been addressed, exercises can be progressed by introducing a greater challenge to the balance and stabilization systems of the body versus simply increasing the load. For example, a client may begin by performing a push-up and then progress by performing the same exercise using a stability ball. This progression requires additional activation from the nervous system and the stabilizing muscles of the shoulders and trunk to maintain optimal posture while performing the exercise (**Figure 13-4**).

## Images

**Figure 13-4: Example push-up progression**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH13_FIGF04_02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 13-4: ).**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH13_FIGF04_01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533