---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Resistance training can promote marked increases in strength and hypertrophy irrespective of age and gender. Resistance training plays a fundamental role in the improvement of athletic performance and rehabilitation from musculoskeletal injury. It is also an effective method for increasing lean body mass and reducing body fat.

The OPT model is based on the scientific rationale of human movement science and uses the principles of integrated training. The OPT model is divided into three different levels of training: stabilization, strength, and power. These are subdivided into five phases.

The focus of Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training includes improving movement pat-terns exercise technique, muscle imbalances, ROM, core and joint stability, and cardiorespiratory conditioning.

Within the strength level are three phases: Phase 2 Strength Endurance Training, Phase 3 Muscular Development Training, and Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training.

The goal of Phase 2 Strength Endurance Training is to enhance stabilization endurance while increasing prime mover strength. These two adaptations are accomplished by performing two exercises in a superset sequence (or back-to-back without rest) with similar joint dynamics.

Phase 3 Muscular Development Training is designed for individuals who have the goal of maximal muscle growth (such as bodybuilders). This phase of training can use a variety of resistance training exercises and methods to elicit a maximal response in muscle growth. This form of exercise can also be beneficial for those seeking to lose body fat while maintaining lean muscle mass.

Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training works toward the goal of maximal prime mover strength by lifting heavy loads. It is a common mode of training for strength athletes and others who require maximal strength.

The power level of the OPT model consists of one phase of training: Phase 5 Power Training. This phase should only be entered after successful completion of the stabilization and strength levels or if the client is well conditioned, exhibits adequate joint and core stability, and is familiar with power forms of exercise. The goal of this phase is to increase maximal strength and rate of force production.

### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Integrated training combines flexibility, cardiorespiratory, core, balance, plyometric, SAQ, and resistance training into one system.

	- When an exercise program is progressive and systematic, using a progressive overload approach, the body becomes stronger by adapting to the new demands placed on it.

	- Fundamental movement patterns include squatting, hip hinge, pulling, pushing, and pressing.

	- Maintaining ideal posture places the client’s body in the most optimal state to perform movement patterns safely and effectively.

	- Optimal ROM allows joints to move freely.

	- Fitness professionals should provide programming that requires movement in all three planes of motion: sagittal, frontal, and transverse.

	- The acute variables for training include repetitions, sets, training intensity, repetition tempo, rest interval, training volume, training frequency, training duration, exercise selection, and exercise order.

	- An ever-changing integrated training approach provides a systematic and progressive approach to fitness training; its components include flexibility, cardiorespiratory, core, balance, plyometric (reactive), SAQ, and resistance training.