---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Dynamic Stretching and Controversial Stretches
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Controversial Stretches

Although flexibility training has numerous benefits, performing certain types of stretches may be a risk for injury. Although most stretches are very safe when performed correctly with proper posture and technique, there are a few **controversial stretches** that may be potentially dangerous.

### INVERTED HURDLER’S STRETCH

This stretch is thought to place high stress on the inside of the knee (medial collateral ligament) and may cause pain and stress on the patella (kneecap) (right knee in **Figure 14-18**). This stretch should not be performed by anyone with a history of knee or low-back pain or injury. Health professionals believe this stretch should not be performed by most patients or general wellness clients.

### PLOW

The plow exercise is a common posture from yoga (**Figure 14-19**). Because of the inverted nature of this stretch (head is lower than the hips), this stretch places high stress on the neck and spine. If this stretch is not done with exact technique, it may place the spine at risk of injury. Clients with a history of neck or back injury should not perform this stretch owing to the high stress it places on these structures. This position should also be avoided by individuals with high blood pressure (hypertension).

## Key Terms

**Controversial stretches**
Stretches that have the potential for injury risk.

## Images

**Figure 14-18: Inverted hurdler’s stretch**
Alt: 9781284200881_CH14_FIGF18.jpg
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF18.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 14-19: Plow**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF19.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533