---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Scientific Rationale for Flexibility Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Heightened activity of the CNS and tissue mechanoreceptors and **nociceptors** (e.g., pain receptors) in the injured area create, in essence, a type of microspasm or tension (Jafri, 2014). As a result of the microspasm, adhesions may begin to form within the myofascial tissues (**Figure 14-13**). These adhesions form a weak, inelastic matrix that decreases normal mobility of the soft tissue (Money, 2017). The result is altered length-tension relationships, altered force-couple relationships, and joint dysfunction (Jafri, 2014; Zhuang et al., 2014). Left unchecked, these adhesions may begin to form structural changes in the soft tissue that are evident by **Davis’s law**.

Davis’s law states that soft tissue will model along the lines of stress (Cyron & Humphrey, 2017; Mueller & Maluf, 2002). Soft tissue remodels or rebuilds itself with a **collagen matrix** that forms in a random fashion and not in the same direction as the muscle fibers. If the myofascia is not stimulated by movement, lengthening, and broadening, these connective tissue fibers may act as a roadblock, preventing soft tissue mobility. This creates alterations in normal tissue mobility and causes relative flexibility (Iqbal & Alghadir, 2017).

## Flexibility Techniques

Flexibility training is a key component for all training programs. It is used for a variety of reasons, including correcting muscle imbalances, increasing joint ROM, improving the extensibility of the muscles, and improving neuromuscular efficiency (Floyd, 2018; Kenney et al., 2019). There are many types of flexibility training, including self-myofascial techniques, static stretching, active stretching, and dynamic stretching, and all of them can be integrated into an exercise regimen. The focus of flexibility training is to enhance tissue extensibility and joint ROM in those tissues found to be overactive during the assessment process.

## Key Terms

**Nociceptors**
Pain receptors located in the skin and fascial connective tissues.

**Davis’s law**
States that soft tissue models along the line of stress.

**Collagen matrix**
A complex meshwork of connective tissue, including collagen proteins.

## Images

**Figure 14-13: Myofascial adhesions**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF13.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533