---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Human Movement System Review
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### ALTERED RECIPROCAL INHIBITION

**Reciprocal inhibition** is a naturally occurring phenomenon that allows movement to take place. Reciprocal inhibition is defined as the simultaneous contraction of the agonist (prime mover) muscle and the relaxation of its antagonist (Floeter et al., 2013). For example, to perform elbow flexion during a biceps curl, the agonist biceps brachii actively contracts while the antagonist triceps brachii relaxes to allow the movement to occur.

However, **altered reciprocal inhibition** is an impairment of the HMS, and fitness professionals should aim to correct this phenomenon. Altered reciprocal inhibition is caused by an **overactive** agonist muscle decreasing the neural drive to its functional antagonist (Page et al., 2010). For example, an overactive hip flexor complex (e.g., iliopsoas, rectus femoris, tensor fascia latae) would decrease neural drive to the hip extensor complex (e.g., gluteus maximus and gluteus medius; Mills et al., 2015). In other words, the overactive muscles on the front of the hip are causing the gluteal muscles to become **underactive**. Another example is overactive chest muscles (e.g., pectoralis major and minor) decreasing neural drive to mid-back muscles (e.g., rhomboids, mid and lower trapezius). In this scenario, the overactive chest muscles (which are shoulder protractors) cause the mid-back muscles (which are shoulder retractors) to become underactive. Altered reciprocal inhibition changes force-couple relationships, produces synergistic dominance, and leads to the development of faulty movement patterns, poor bodily control, and joint dysfunction.

### SYNERGISTIC DOMINANCE

**Synergistic dominance** is a neuromuscular phenomenon that occurs when synergists take over function for a weak or inhibited prime mover (agonist; Camargo & Neumann, 2019; Mills et al., 2015). For example, if the hip flexor complex is overactive, it leads to altered reciprocal inhibition of the hip extensor complex, which in turn results in increased force output of the synergists for hip extension (hamstring complex) to compensate for the weakened hip extensors (Mills et al., 2015). In other words, if the gluteal muscles are underactive and not able to produce force effectively, other muscles, such as the hamstrings, are now recruited more than usual to assist in performing hip extension. The result of synergistic dominance is faulty movement patterns leading to soft tissue and joint dysfunction and eventual injury (such as hamstring strains).

#### HELPFUL HINT

Synergistic dominance can be a difficult concept to understand. To help, imagine a professional basketball team who has a star player named Michael. Michael is the team’s leading scorer and the team’s best defender. His skills are unquestionably better than his teammates. Now, imagine Michael hurts his ankle and his backup is inserted into the starting lineup. His backup can do all of the things Michael can (e.g., dribble, shoot, defend), but not as well. Consequently, the team is not as productive and does not play its best basketball. The human body works in a similar fashion. For example, if overactive hip flexors decrease neural drive to the hip extensors (gluteal complex), then synergistic muscles (hamstrings) must “pick up the slack” for the inhibited glutei. In other words, the hamstrings have been inserted into the starting lineup to replace the gluteal complex to perform hip extension movements. Yet, the hamstrings are not as well equipped as the gluteal complex to perform hip extension during functional tasks.

## Key Terms

**Reciprocal inhibition**
When an agonist receives a signal to contract, its functional antagonist also receives an inhibitory signal allowing it to lengthen.

**Altered reciprocal inhibition**
Occurs when an overactive agonist muscle decreases the neural drive to its functional antagonist.

**Overactive**
When elevated neural drive causes a muscle to be held in a chronic state of contraction.

**Underactive**
When a muscle is experiencing neural inhibition and limited neuromuscular recruitment.

**Synergistic dominance**
The neuromuscular phenomenon that occurs when synergists take over function for a weak or inhibited prime mover (agonist).