---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: General Guidelines for Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Type

**Type** refers to the mode of activity selected. It should be noted that there are three criteria that must be met for an activity or exercise to be considered “aerobic” exercise. For a mode of exercise to be considered aerobic, it should (a) be rhythmic, (b) use large muscle groups, and (c) be continuous in nature. Some examples of modes of aerobic exercise include the following:

	- Jogging

	- Walking

	- Exercising on cardio equipment

	- Swimming

	- Cycling (indoors or outdoors)

In addition to recognizing modes or types of cardiorespiratory exercise, such as swimming or cycling, it is also important for fitness professionals to be familiar with various cardio formats. Many of these formats also involve stressing both aerobic and anaerobic energy pathways and include interval training, high-intensity interval training, Tabata, and Fartlek training.

### INTERVAL TRAINING

Interval training has received a great amount of research attention over the years (Batacan et al., 2016; Milanović et al., 2015). This training format involves brief periods of higher exertion efforts coupled with lower-intensity periods. The exertion efforts (i.e., intervals) can be moderate to highly intense, depending on the goals, needs, and abilities of the client.

Work-to-rest ratios can be calculated and altered to change the stress applied during each workout. Generally, ratios ranging from 1:1 to 1:5 are used to provide adequate recovery within each interval; however, work-to-rest ratios can vary dramatically depending on the client’s fitness level and the mode of exercise performed. Fitness professionals can alter both the intensity and work-to-rest ratios to vary training stress throughout the program.

Moderately intense intervals involve exercise at a medium intensity with the goal to complete a set number of programmed intervals rather than reach maximal or near-maximal effort during each iteration. Moderate intensities are best for beginning exercisers and for occasional reduction in overall training stress to avoid **overtraining**.

High-intensity intervals place a considerable challenge on the metabolic energy systems by pushing the client to near-maximal effort during each repetition. This type of interval training is commonly known as **high-intensity interval training (HIIT)**.

### HIGH-INTENSITY INTERVAL TRAINING

*HIIT* is a term commonly used today to describe shorter bouts of high-intensity work at maximal or near-maximal performance (e.g., sprinting) followed by recovery periods (e.g., slow jog or walking). Although interval training has a long-standing reputation in the realm of sports conditioning given the stop-start nature of many sports, its popularity has grown within recreational fitness due to its compressed timeframe for achieving improvements in physical fitness and health when compared to continuous exercise methods (Gaesser & Angadi, 2011).

HIIT has been shown to be an effective mode for improving cardiorespiratory fitness because it can produce comparable results in a compressed period of time and with a smaller volume of work. It also aids in weight loss and reduction of cholesterol levels and blood pressure in a similar manner to **steady-state (SS) aerobic exercise** (Costa et al., 2018; Viana et al., 2019; Wewege et al., 2017; Wood et al., 2019). Even though HIIT training offers a key benefit of time efficiency (i.e., less time exercising), not all clients will adhere to its strenuous demands, nor is it required to achieve most health or wellness goals.

## Key Terms

**Type**
The mode of physical activity in which an individual is engaged.

**Overtraining**
Excessive frequency, volume, or intensity of training, resulting in reduction of performance, which is also caused by a lack of proper rest and recovery.

**High-intensity interval training (HIIT)**
An exercise training method defined by intervals of near-maximal intensity broken up by relatively short rest periods.

**Steady-state (SS) aerobic exercise**
Aerobic exercise that remains at a relatively constant intensity, including a stable heart rate and oxygen consumption.