---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Introduction to Stage Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### STAGE 1

Cardiorespiratory exercise in stage 1 is beneficial for those new to exercise who are seeking to improve health markers, such as reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease and diabetes (Nystoriak & Bhatnagar, 2018). Stage 1 represents the lowest intensities of exercise and is used to introduce individuals to exercise and improve general health and fitness and is also used as a recovery format following higher-intensity exercise sessions. Stage 1 is designed to help improve cardiorespiratory fitness levels in apparently healthy sedentary clients using a target intensity below ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1) and involves steady-state aerobic exercise. In other words, when using the talk-test method to monitor training intensity, the client should be able to easily hold a conversation during the duration of the activity. If using RPE to measure intensity, the client should feel the exercise intensity as light to moderate. The exerciser is starting to sweat, but they can still carry on a conversation effortlessly.

In stage 1, clients should start slowly and gradually work up to 30 minutes of continuous activity (**Figure 15-1**). Clients who can maintain a zone 1 intensity for at least 30 minutes three times per week will be ready for stage 2. However, a deconditioned client might take 2 to 3 months to meet this demand, depending on their current fitness level and how often they exercise. Goals of stage 1 training are to help clients build an appropriate aerobic base and foun­dational level of fitness. Moreover, this stage may serve as a motivation tool to help clients ad­here to a physically active lifestyle, because clients are more likely to continue with an exercise program that is moderately difficult yet achievable.

As with any exercise program, rate of progression must be considered. Stage 1 workouts can be progressed by gradually adding duration to each exercise session. For example, a week 1 program may involve 15 minutes of continuous aerobic exercise, 3 days per week. Each subsequent week an additional few minutes can be added to each exercise session until the client successfully manages 30 minutes of continuous exercise three times per week. It is important not to exceed more than 10% of added volume per week to avoid overtraining or burnout.

### STAGE 2

Stage 2 is designed for clients with intermediate cardiorespiratory fitness levels who are ready and who desire to begin training at a slightly higher intensity. The focus of stage 2 training is on increasing the workload (e.g., speed, incline) in a way that helps clients exercise at higher intensities and achieve greater levels of aerobic fitness. Stage 2 is ideal for fitness enthusiasts who regularly engage in physical activity or recreational sport or for those seeking further improvements in cardiovascular endurance or weight loss.

Prior to initiating a stage 2 workout, fitness professionals should perform the talk test with their client to determine their client’s heart rate at VT1. Once identified, ideally this measurement would be used to monitor exercise intensity throughout the duration of the stage 2 workout.

## Images

**Figure 15-1: Example stage 1 workout**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH15_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533