---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: General Guidelines for Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# General Guidelines for Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training

Fitness professionals need to understand and appreciate the fact that no two individuals will ever respond and adapt to cardiorespiratory exercise in exactly the same way. In other words, the physical and perceptual responses to exercise are highly variable, even among individuals of similar age, fitness, and health. Thus, all exercise training recommendations, including cardiorespiratory exercise, must be individually determined and should use the FITTE-VP principle (Garber et al., 2011). FITTE-VP stands for “frequency, intensity, type, time, enjoyment, volume, and progression.” Each of these concepts will be described in this chapter.

## Frequency

**Frequency** refers to the number of training sessions in a given time period, usually expressed as per week. Moderate-intensity exercise (e.g., brisk walking) should be performed at least five times per week, whereas vigorous-intensity exercise (e.g., jogging or running) should be performed at least three times per week, or a combination of moderate-intensity and vigorous-intensity is also acceptable (**Table 15-1**) (Piercy et al., 2018; World Health Organization, 2015).

**TABLE 15-1 Aerobic Activity Recommendations**

| Frequency | Time | Type |
|---|---|---|
| At least 5 days per week | 150 minutes per week | Moderate-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., brisk walking) |
| At least 3 days per week | 75 minutes per week | Vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., jogging or running) |
| 3–5 days per week | Combination of moderate and vigorous intensity: Any combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activities |

## Intensity

**Intensity** refers to the level of demand that a given activity places on the body. For general health requirements, such as reducing the risk of chronic disease, moderate-intensity is recommended (Piercy et al., 2018; World Health Organization, 2015). Moderate exercise typically represents an intensity range that is enough of a demand to increase heart and respiratory rate but does not cause exhaustion or breathlessness for the average untrained apparently healthy adult (Piercy et al., 2018; World Health Organization, 2015). In other words, the individual should be able to talk comfortably during exercise or physical activity. Higher intensities are generally required for improvements in overall fitness and conditioning. However, any combination of the two will also result in improved health.

### METHODS FOR ASSIGNING EXERCISE INTENSITY

Cardiorespiratory exercise intensity can be monitored in numerous ways. Some methods for monitoring cardiorespiratory exercise intensity include calculating VO~2max~, using percentages of maximal heart rate (HR~max~), percentages of heart rate reserve (HRR), metabolic equivalents (METs), ratings of perceived exertion (RPE), and the talk test. Some of these methods are more practical for fitness professionals to implement with clients than others.

#### VO2max

The traditional gold standard measurement for cardiorespiratory fitness is VO~2max~, often expressed as the maximal volume of oxygen consumed per kilogram of body weight per minute (mL/kg per min). In other words, VO~2max~ is the maximal amount of oxygen that an individual can use during intense exercise. Once VO~2max ~is determined, a common method to establish exercise training intensity is to have clients exercise at a percentage of their VO~2max~.

## Key Terms

**Frequency**
The number of training sessions in a given timeframe.

**Intensity**
The level of demand placed on the body by a given activity.