---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### HELPFUL HINT

The five components of fitness include the following:

	- Cardiorespiratory (aerobic) fitness

	- Muscular strength

	- Muscular endurance

	- Flexibility

	- Body composition

Cardiorespiratory training is a way of planning training programs that systematically progress clients through various stages to achieve optimal levels of physical and performance adaptations by placing stress on the cardiorespiratory system. One of the most common errors made by fitness professionals during the planning and implementation of cardiorespiratory exercise programs is the failure to consider **rate of progression**. Rate of progression is critical to help clients achieve their personal health and fitness goals in the most efficient and effective use of time and energy. In addition, failure to carefully consider and monitor rate of progression of each client on an individual basis can also result in injury if progression is too fast, or in poor exercise **adherence** if the progression is too slow. Thus, applying proven scientific principles to the design of cardiorespiratory fitness training programs will help ensure that clients maximize their potential to achieve optimal levels of physical and performance adaptations.

## Benefits of Cardiorespiratory Fitness

The benefits of regular physical activity and structured exercise are numerous. Individuals can achieve numerous health-related benefits from modest amounts of moderate-intensity exercise and even greater benefits from vigorous-intensity exercise, or a combination of both. Engaging in regular, sustained physical activity over one’s life span is one of the most reliable predictors of death and disability. In fact, research has confirmed that an individual’s cardiorespiratory fitness level is a strong predictor of **morbidity** and **mortality** (Kim et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2010). In other words, poor cardiorespiratory fitness is related to a marked increase in risk of premature death from all causes, but particularly from cardiovascular disease. Conversely, an improvement in cardiorespiratory fitness is related to a reduction in premature death from all causes (Kim et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2010).

Research demonstrates that cardiorespiratory exercise and physical activity provide many benefits that enhance health, longevity, and weight loss (Wasfy & Baggish, 2016). Individuals who are more active on a regular basis enhance their likelihood for attaining these benefits, whereas sedentary individuals may experience rapid deteriorations in their overall health and well-being.

## Key Terms

**Rate of progression**
The process and speed from which frequency, intensity, time, and type are increased.

**Adherence**
The level of commitment to a behavior or plan of action.

**Morbidity**
The state of having a disease.

**Mortality**
A state or a risk of death or dying.