---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 16
chapter_title: Core Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Importance of Properly Training the Core Muscles
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# CRITICAL

It is important for fitness professionals to work closely alongside healthcare providers, who are trained to diagnose and treat individuals with injuries. It is beyond the scope of practice for a Certified Personal Trainer to diagnose an injury or perform the functions of a licensed rehabilitation specialist (e.g., physical therapist, physiotherapist, chiropractor, orthopedist).

Clients with LBP can be taught to improve functionality of core muscles to improve core stability and reduce LBP. For example, performing an abdominal **drawing-in maneuver** increases muscle activation of the transverse abdominis. Transverse abdominis activation improves with 4 weeks of training in those with and without LBP (Selkow et al., 2017). Using proper exercise techniques can reduce pain in those with LBP. Using hyperextension exercises without proper LBP stabilization has been shown to increase pressure on the discs to dangerous levels. These unsupported exercises can cause damage to the ligaments that support the vertebrae, which may lead to a narrowing of the vertebrae openings that spinal nerves pass through (Ashmen et al., 1996; Beim et al., 1997). Therefore, it is crucial for fitness professionals to incorporate a systematic, progressive approach when training the core, ensuring the local core muscles that stabilize the spine are strengthened before or in conjunction with the global musculature that moves the spine and extremities.

# HELPFUL HINT

Electromyography is a procedure that measures the electrical conducting function of nerves in muscles. An electromyography is able to identify differences in muscle or muscle group activation when performing different movements or exercises.

## Key Terms

**Drawing-in maneuver**
A maneuver used to recruit the local core stabilizers by drawing in the navel toward the spine.