---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 16
chapter_title: Core Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Core Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Global Muscles

Global core musculature is positioned more superficial on the trunk when compared to local core musculature. The global muscles of the core act to move the trunk, transfer loads between the upper and lower extremities, and provide stability of the spine by stabilizing multiple segments together as functional units. These muscles are primarily responsible for concentric force production and eccentric deceleration during dynamic activities. The primary global muscles of the core include (but are not limited to) the rectus abdominis, external obliques, latissimus dorsi, gluteus maximus, hip flexors, and extrinsic (superficial) erector spinae.

Collectively, all of the muscles within each system provide dynamic stabilization and neuromuscular control of the entire core (LPHC; Xie & Wang, 2019). The global muscles produce force (concentric actions), attenuate force (eccentric actions), and provide stabilization in all planes of movement during dynamic activities. In isolation, global muscles do not effectively achieve stabilization of the LPHC; rather it is through their cooperative functioning with the local musculature that they enhance stability and neuromuscular control (Weber et al., 2018). To better understand how these muscles work to stabilize the LPHC, it helps to view the systems from the inside out (local muscles → global muscles). In other words, training the global muscles before training the local muscles would not be ideal from both a structural and biomechanical standpoint. Doing so could be compared to building a house without a foundation. The foundation must be developed first to provide a stable platform for the remaining components of the house to be built on. One must first be stable to move efficiently.