---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 16
chapter_title: Core Training Concepts
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

The core musculature helps protect the spine from harmful forces that occur during functional activities. Effective core training focuses on optimizing core stability, endurance, strength, and power. Focusing on each of these components is an important part of ensuring that individuals can effectively stabilize their core, as well as forcefully move their trunk. Both local and global muscles must be trained to effectively acquire core stability, endurance, strength, and power adaptations. Local muscles, such as the rotatores, multifidus, and transverse abdominis, generally act to provide dynamic control of spinal segments important for core stability. Global muscles, such as the rectus abdominis, external and internal abdominal obliques, and erector spinae, act to move the trunk during core strengthening exercises. Fitness professionals should ensure that local muscles are effective in stabilizing the spine when introducing more advanced core exercises that use global muscles to move the trunk. Additionally, it is critical to ensure both local and global core muscles demonstrate adequate endurance due to the continuous need for optimal spinal stability and precise trunk movements during many activities.