---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Guidelines for Balance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# TRAINING TIP

The market currently offers several training modalities (i.e., types of equipment) that challenge one’s balance, and they can be very useful tools. However, to ensure the safety and effectiveness of balance training, individuals must start in an environment they can safely control and go through a systematic progression (i.e., floor, balance beam, half-foam roll, foam pad, and balance disc). Wobble boards can also be included in the progression, but the type of structure of the wobble board will dictate proper progression. Failing to follow the proper progression can cause movement compensations and improper executions of the exercise, decreasing the effectiveness of the exercise and increasing the risk for injury.

These types of exercises should be mastered before moving to more difficult forms of balance training. Sample exercises that follow this protocol include (but are not limited to) the following:

	- Tandem stance

	- Single-leg balance

	- Single-leg balance reach

	- Single-leg hip internal and external rotation

	- Single-leg lift and chop

	- Single-leg arm and leg motion

	- Single-leg windmill

	- Single-leg throw and catch

The next progression involves dynamic eccentric and concentric movement of the balance leg through a full range of motion. Movements require dynamic control in the mid-range of motion, with isometric stabilization at the end-range of motion. The speed and neural demands of each exercise are progressed. Sample exercises following this protocol include (but are not limited to) the following:

	- Single-leg squat

	- Single-leg squat touchdown

	- Single-leg Romanian deadlift

	- Multiplanar step-up to balance

	- Multiplanar lunge to balance

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH17_BOXTT02_01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533