---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

An individual’s ability to maintain the body’s center of gravity over its base of support without falling represents the overall mechanism of the balance system. A comprehensive balance training program can be designed by a fitness professional to optimize performance, improve injury resistance, and enhance rehabilitation. During balance exercises, fitness professionals can manipulate the visual, vestibular, and somatosensation conditions of the activity to challenge the client. Balance training programs must be systematic and progressive, following specific program guidelines, proper exercise selection criteria, and detailed program variables. Specifically, progressing from static to semi-dynamic to dynamic balance conditions will increase the difficulty of the balance task. Fitness professionals should incorporate balance training into programs for clients of all ages and activity levels.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

An individual’s balance ability is a critical component of improving performance, enhancing injury resistance, and optimizing rehabilitation following injury. Balance is defined as the ability to maintain one’s center of gravity within that person’s base of support. Balance can be classified into static, semi-dynamic, and dynamic, which describes situations in which the body maintains balance in stationary to moving positions. To maintain and/or correct balance during static and dynamic conditions, the body relies on input from visual, vestibular, and somatosensory systems. These systems work together to properly execute the necessary neuromuscular programs to achieve proper balance.

Research strongly supports the idea that individuals who participate in balance training exercises can have many positive outcomes. Athletes who undergo balance training within an injury prevention program have demonstrated improved movement quality during landing tasks, muscle activity, and proprioception, all of which may reduce the risk of common lower extremity injuries, like ACL ruptures or ankle sprains. Additionally, older adults who regularly perform balance exercises have improved confidence and reduce the risk of falls.

Fitness professionals should implement progressive, systematic balance training programs to develop consistent, long-term changes in their clients. Augmenting traditional stretching and strengthening regimens with balance exercises can result in more comprehensively trained clients. When designing a balance program, a Certified Personal Trainer must follow specific program guidelines, including proper exercise selection criteria and progressive milestones. For example, a single-leg balance exercise could be advanced by closing the eyes, passing a ball back and forth, or standing on an unstable surface. Manipulating one variable at a time can be a helpful way to ensure that the exercise progresses at the right pace, and so the fitness professional can differentiate areas where a client may need extra attention and training. Common balance training progressions include standing on a stable and then an unstable surface, moving a different part of the body while maintaining single-limb balance, and moving (i.e., a hop) in multiple directions with a brief pause and good neuromuscular control.

A Certified Personal Trainer can try many creative exercise options and exercise conditions with a client to challenge the balance system. Training the balance system can be exciting, as a client learns to integrate strength, flexibility, and neuromuscular control into static and dynamic positions of body control.