---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Scientific Rationale for Balance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
In older individuals, balance training can improve functionality when applied to activities of daily living (e.g., chores, shopping, grooming, bathing), which may decrease their overall disability (Roaldsen et al., 2014).

Furthermore, balance training tends to improve vertical jump performance in youth basketball players when compared to isometric strength training (Boccolini et al., 2013). Similarly, performing balance training along with agility exercises may improve dynamic balance during eyes-open and eyes-closed conditions, as well as improve agility-based outcomes and reaction time (Zemková & Hamar, 2010). Therefore, balance training should be considered as an important component of improving performance (**Table 17-1**).

**TABLE 17-1 Balance Training for Performance**

| Improves static and dynamic balance
	Improves neuromuscular control in the lower extremities
	Improves balance after injury
	Improves lower extremity muscular strength (especially when combined with resistance training)
	Improves ability to participate in activities of daily living and decreases self-reported disability in older adults
	Improves agility-based outcomes in athletes |
|---|

#### TRAINING TIP

Balance training has been shown to improve balance and coordination, which are necessary components in the process of becoming a well-rounded athlete. For safety reasons, balance exercises and equipment (e.g., foam pad, balance disc, wobble board) should not be used in conjunction with heavy loads, such as maximal or near maximal lifts (Brachman et al., 2017).

### INJURY RESISTANCE

Balance training is an important component to emphasize when developing a program to improve injury resistance, whether the fitness professional is working with an athlete participating in a sport or a client whose goal is to perform daily living activities without falling.

Balance exercises are commonly included in lower extremity programs, referred to as injury prevention programs, for athletes to bolster resistance to injury. When designing injury prevention programs, these components are typically incorporated: stretching, strength, plyometric, and balance activities. Comprehensive injury prevention programs that include balance training have been shown to improve landing mechanics, which may decrease the risk of lower extremity injuries (Padua et al., 2012). Youth soccer athletes who participated in a 9-week injury prevention program demonstrated improvements in time-to-stabilization (a measure of balance ability), as well as vertical jump height (DiStefano et al., 2010). Female basketball athletes who participated in a 5-week balance training program improved landing movement mechanics and muscle activation during a single-limb landing, which may reduce the risk of certain lower extremity injuries, like an **anterior cruciate ligament** (ACL) injury (Nagano et al., 2011). In fact, a study by DuPrey and colleagues (2016) found that collegiate athletes with poor balance during landing tasks were at an increased risk of ACL rupture. A **systematic review** demonstrated that athletes undergoing balance training reduced the risk of suffering an ankle sprain by 46% when compared to athletes lacking any balance training (Bellows & Wong, 2018).

## Key Terms

**Anterior cruciate ligament**
A key ligament within the knee joint that provides stability to limit excessive motion of the tibia relative to the femur.

**Systematic review**
A type of research article that synthesizes and summarizes findings from multiple existing research articles on a specific topic.