---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Guidelines for Balance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Designing a Balance Training Program

A proper balance training program should be systematic and progressive. Exercises can be progressed or regressed by changing the requirements for surface, visual condition, and body position or movement. Surfaces will change in difficulty as an individual moves from a stable surface (floor) to an unstable surface (e.g., half-foam roll, foam pad, or balance disc). Keeping the eyes open during an exercise is easier than having the eyes closed (visual input), moving the head around to look at various objects (vestibular input), or performing a cognitive task simultaneously (dual-task condition). Moving the contralateral (opposite) leg, trunk, or arms also makes a balance exercise more challenging, whereas standing on two legs (versus a single leg) simplifies the exercise. Caution should be used to change only one variable at a time. Following this strategy of progressions will enable the fitness professional to easily adapt exercises for each individual client, regardless of age or level of fitness.

### BALANCE TRAINING PROGRESSIONS

When introducing balance exercises into an exercise program, the exercises should initially involve little joint motion of the balance leg. These entry-level balance exercises are designed to improve reflexive (automatic) muscle contractions to increase joint stability. Using this protocol, the body is placed in an unstable environment, so it learns to react by contracting the right muscles at the right time to maintain balance.