---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Scientific Rationale for Balance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Scientific Rationale for Balance Training

Researchers have shown that balance training can be effective at optimizing performance, improving resistance to injury, and enhancing rehabilitation. It is important for fitness professionals to understand the scientific basis for balance, ways to design a balance routine catering to the needs of the client, and methods to effectively communicate and efficiently implement a balance training program.

### PERFORMANCE

Several studies have demonstrated successful improvement in balance ability after healthy, physically active individuals have completed a balance training program. A systematic review found that 10-minute balance training programs, in which children performed three times per week for 4 weeks, appear to improve both their static and dynamic balance ability (DiStefano et al., 2009). Balance training has been shown successful in improving motor function of muscles in the lower extremity (Sefton et al., 2011), as well as **neuromuscular control**, especially for those who have suffered from chronic ankle sprains (Zech et al., 2010). Individuals with musculoskeletal injuries can improve their ability to maintain their center of mass within their limits of stability by specifically engaging in balance training (Wortmann & Docherty, 2013).

Balance training should be incorporated into overall training programs, because balance training may improve additional performance metrics important to clients. For example, adding balance training to a resistance-training program can enhance lower extremity muscle strength gains, indicating that resistance-training regimens should include balance training to optimize strength gains (Heitkamp et al., 2001).

## Key Terms

**Neuromuscular control**
The response (conscious or unconscious) of the muscles within the body to control purposeful movement.