---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 18
chapter_title: Plyometric (Reactive) Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Guidelines for Plyometric Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Essentially, the higher intensity the drill, the more rest is needed between sets. By not providing a sufficient recovery period between sets, adequate recovery may not occur and thus will negate potential benefits. As a general rule, recovery times of 60 to 120 seconds between drills should be sufficient for full recovery, but this is strictly determined by the client’s fitness level. See **Table 18-2** for a list of plyometric training guidelines.

**TABLE 18-2 Plyometric Training Guidelines**

| Plyometric Training Variables |
|---|
| Planes of motion

	Sagittal
	Frontal
	Transverse | Volume

	Sets

		Low
		Moderate
		High

	Repetitions

		Low
		Moderate
		High |
| Speed of motion

	Slow
	Medium
	Fast
	Explosive | Safety

	Performed with supportive shoes
	Performed on a proper training surface

		Grass field
		Basketball court
		Tartan track surface
		Rubber track surface

	Performed with proper supervision |
| Progressive

	Easy to hard
	Low to high amplitude
	Simple to complex
	Known to unknown
	Body weight to loaded
	Activity specific | Recovery

	Allow at least 24 hours between plyometric training sessions

		48–72 hours for new or deconditioned clients |

### PLYOMETRIC TRAINING PROGRESSIONS

When introducing plyometric exercises, especially to new or beginner clients, the movements should initially involve small jumps (lower amplitude) to best learn the movement pattern. They are designed to establish optimal landing mechanics, postural alignment, and eccentric strength (ability to decelerate). When an individual lands during these exercises, they should hold the landing position (or stabilize) for 3–5 seconds. During this time, individuals should make any adjustments necessary to correct faulty postures before performing the next jump. Example exercises using this protocol include (but are not limited to) the following:

	- Squat jump with stabilization

	- Box jump-up with stabilization

	- Box jump-down with stabilization

	- Multiplanar jump with stabilization