---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 18
chapter_title: Plyometric (Reactive) Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Principles of Plyometric Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Potential energy is stored in the elastic components of the muscle during this loading phase much like stretching a rubber band. This eccentric phase is predicated on three stretch variables: magnitude of the stretch, rate of the stretch, and duration of the stretch (Davies et al., 2015). Any manipulation of these key variables can enhance the amount of energy stored during the eccentric prestretch action.

#### THE AMORTIZATION PHASE

The next phase is known as the **amortization phase**, also referred to as the transition period or phase, which represents the time between the eccentric phase and the initiation of the concentric contraction (discussed next). In other words, the amortization phase is the period of time from which the eccentric phase ends to the time when the concentric muscle contraction begins (Slimani et al., 2016). The amortization phase is also referred to as the electromechanical delay, which describes that space in time during which the muscle must switch from overcoming force to imparting force in the intended direction (Davies et al., 2015). This phase is critical to plyometric performance, because the shorter the amortization phase is, the more effective and powerful the subsequent plyometric movement will be, as the stored elastic energy is used efficiently in the transition. If the amortization phase is prolonged, the stored elastic energy is dissipated as heat, and the stretch reflex is not fully used, which results in significantly less concentric force output (Davies et al., 2015). One of the primary objectives of plyometric training is to reduce the time in the amortization phase. Therefore, a rapid switch from an eccentric loading phase to a concentric contraction leads to a more powerful response (Davies et al., 2015; Slimani et al., 2016).

#### THE CONCENTRIC PHASE

The final phase is the concentric phase, which represents the body’s response to the events that occurred during the eccentric and amortization phases. The concentric phase uses the stored elastic energy from the eccentric phase to either enhance muscle force production or dissipate the energy as heat. For example, during a half movement in a basketball jump shot, as soon as the upward movement begins, the concentric phase has initiated, and the amortization phase has ended. Together, the stretch-shortening cycle describes an eccentric phase in which the muscle is stretched, followed by an amortization phase where the muscle is in a stabilizing, isometric transitional period, which leads to a concentric phase that uses the stored energy in the muscle to deliver an explosive action (**Table 18-1**) (Oxfeldt et al., 2019; Slimani et al., 2016).

**TABLE 18-1 Components of the Stretch-Shortening Cycle**

| Phase | Physiological Event | Action |
|---|---|---|
| Eccentric | Stored elastic energy; stimulation of muscle spindles, signal sent to spinal cord | Stretch of agonist muscle |
| Amortization | Nerves meet synapse in spinal cord, signal sent to stretched muscle | Time between the eccentric and concentric phases |
| Concentric | Elastic energy release, enhanced muscle force production | Shortening of agonist muscle |

## Key Terms

**Amortization phase**
The transition from eccentric loading to concentric unloading during the stretch-shortening cycle.