---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 19
chapter_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness for Nonathletic Populations
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

A 10% loss of bone density at the hip can result in a 2.5 times greater risk for hip fracture (West et al., 2015).

The confidence and ability to sit, stand, bend, twist, and walk are essential in older adult populations to aid in the prevention of falls and maintain daily life activities. The abilities required for safe, effective movement often decline with age primarily because they are underused (Laroche et al., 2007). To maintain and improve these abilities, it is essential that older populations practice coordinative skills on a regular basis. SAQ-based programs have been found to improve coordination and movement confidence, decreasing the likelihood of falling or other movement-related injuries (Bohrer et al., 2019; Jessen & Lund, 2017; Liu-Ambrose et al., 2004; Sundstrup et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2017).

**Sarcopenia**, or age-related loss of skeletal muscle mass, can be detrimental to maintaining functional capacity in older adults. Resistance training as well as SAQ-based interventions has been found to help slow and reverse this process. Slowing and reversing sarcopenia has particular relevance with interventions requiring increased speed of movement and rate of force production, similar to those found in SAQ protocols (Bean et al., 2004; Bibiloni et al., 2018; Newton et al., 2002; Porter, 2006).

When designing an SAQ program for older adults, the fitness professional must take special care when ensuring safety for participants. Drills should focus around activities the individuals will need for daily life, such as standing up from a chair and navigating ground obstacles. Fitness professionals should consider the clients’ readiness for SAQ exercise before beginning these drills. Prior to beginning SAQ drills, fitness professionals must ensure that older clients are able to perform common activities of daily living, such as rising from a chair, maintaining balance while walking and maneuvering, comfortably moving up and down stairs, squatting, lunging, and bending. As adults age, visual tracking and vestibular (balance) performance also decrease, increasing the risk of missteps and falls.

While SAQ training can have positive impacts, the risk of falls must be considered prior to introducing SAQ training. A foundation of strength and flexibility is very important to ensure that older clients can safely perform SAQ exercises and gain the value offered by these exercises. A gradual progression over several months, from simple to more complex exercises, is important to allow clients plenty of time to learn different exercises at an appropriately challenging level.

# TRAINING TIP

Initially, low volume (i.e., one to two sets of one to two drills) is sufficient to improve fitness among older adults, and progression to more volume should occur slowly, avoiding large increases in volume from one week to the next.

## Key Terms

**Sarcopenia**
An age-related loss of muscle mass resulting in weakness and frailty in older adults.