---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 19
chapter_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness for Nonathletic Populations
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### SAQ CIRCUITS FOR WEIGHT-LOSS POPULATIONS

**Circuit 1**

	- Jump rope: 30 seconds (using various foot patterns)

	- Rest for 20 to 60 seconds depending on the client’s ability to maintain intensity.

	- Cone Shuffles: 30 seconds

		- Place eight cones in a line about 30 inches (76 centimeters) apart.

		- The client lines up facing the line of cones.

		- The client lowers their center of gravity and side shuffles in and out of the cones without hitting them.

		- The client first performs this facing forward and then facing backward.

		- This is repeated for the duration of the station.

		- Other foot patterns can be used as well, such as forward, backward, and stepping over the cones.

	- Rest 20 seconds.

	- Any three ladder drills: 30 seconds (see Agility Ladder Drills)

**Circuit 2**

	- 5-10-5 Drill: 30 seconds (see 5-10-5 Drill)

	- Rest 20 seconds.

	- Modified Box Drill: 30 seconds (see Modified Box Drill)

	- Rest 20 seconds.

	- Partner Mirror Drill: 30 seconds

		- Place two cones 10 yards apart.

		- Two clients stand in between the cones, facing one another.

		- One partner is designated the leader; the other is designated the mirror.

		- Staying in between the cones, the leader moves in a variety of patterns, shuffling, jumping, dropping to the ground, turning around, and so forth.

		- The mirror mimics the motion of the leader without falling behind.

		- The leader and the mirror switch each time the drill is done.

## SAQ Training for Older Adults

SAQ training for seniors may help prevent age-related decreases in **bone density**, coordinative ability, and muscular power (Bean et al., 2002; Liu-Ambrose et al., 2005). This aids in the prevention of injury and an increase in quality of life (Bean et al., 2002; Galpin et al., 2008; Liu-Ambrose et al., 2005; Sobolewski et al., 2018). Although some loss of physical function is an inevitability of the aging process, recent research has determined that these losses can be minimized by appropriate exercise interventions. **Osteopenia**, or loss of bone density and a precursor to osteoporosis, is often related to the aging process, particularly in women. This increases the likelihood for bone fractures and other acute and chronic skeletal disorders, such as **osteoporosis**. Research has determined that properly administered programs requiring an elevated degree of load on the skeletal system (e.g., weight-bearing exercise), such as those found in SAQ protocols, are safe and effective in slowing and potentially reversing osteopenia in older adults (Heinonen et al., 1996; Iwamoto et al., 2001).

## Key Terms

**Bone density**
The amount of mineral content, such as calcium and phosphorus, in a segment of bone.

**Osteopenia**
Lower than normal bone density and a precursor to osteoporosis.

**Osteoporosis**
A condition of reduced bone mineral density, which increases risk of bone fracture.