---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 19
chapter_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### CHAPTER REVIEW

After ensuring that a client is ready for SAQ training, fitness professionals can include SAQ drills in a progressive fashion beginning with low-volume, simple movements and then move to faster, more complex movements at higher volumes over a span of several months. Exercises that require a client to quickly respond to a signal or stimulus and move smoothly through a series of dynamic patterns can be useful in promoting overall fitness even among nonathletic populations. These drills should first focus on quality of movement, enabling the client to learn and practice movements and skills to which they may not be accustomed. As technique is mastered, speed of movement can increase to challenge the neuromuscular system to respond and perform more rapidly.

When implemented correctly, apparently healthy adults, as well as youths, older adults, or weight-loss clients can enjoy SAQ exercise and achieve valuable fitness improvements. SAQ exercises can contribute to caloric expenditure and weight-loss efforts, especially when performed in an interval fashion. Young clients can gain coordination and athleticism through the incorporation of SAQ exercises. Older adults can achieve many of the same benefits as weight-loss clients while also experiencing a positive impact on bone density, power, reaction time, and coordination. These adaptations are important in the prevention of falls and the maintenance of independence later in life. In all, the benefits of SAQ exercise in many different populations are significant and fitness professionals can have an important impact on their clients’ lives through skillful implementation of these training methods.

### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- SAQ training is a useful and effective method of fitness training that stimulates muscular, neurological, connective tissue, and even cardiovascular fitness adaptations.

	- SAQ exercises can promote improvements in physical performance and sustain youthful movement throughout life.

	- SAQ training will allow clients to enhance their ability to accelerate, decelerate, and dynamically stabilize their entire body during high-velocity movements in all planes of motion.

	- Speed, the product of stride rate and stride length, refers to the velocity of distance covered divided by time.

	- Agility necessitates the ability to start (or accelerate), stop (or decelerate and stabilize), and change direction while maintaining postural control.

	- Quickness refers to the ability to react to a stimulus and appropriately change the motion of the body in response to that stimulus.

	- Stride rate is the number of strides taken in a given amount of time (or distance).

	- Stride length is the distance covered in one stride.

	- Proper running mechanics will enable the client to maximize force generation through biomechanical efficiency.

	- Components of an SAQ program can significantly improve the physical health profile of apparently healthy, sedentary, nonathletic adults and those with medical or health limitations.

	- SAQ programs for youth have been found to decrease the likelihood of athletic injury, increase the likelihood of exercise participation later in life, and improve physical fitness.

	- SAQ training for older adults may help prevent age-related decreases in bone density, coordinative ability, and muscular power.

	- The high-intensity, short bouts of SAQ drills make them a valid choice for interval training protocols with appropriate nonathletic populations, including weight-loss clients.