---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 19
chapter_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness for Nonathletic Populations
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
SAQ training for youth is an effective way of providing a variety of exposures to various physiologic, neuromuscular, and biomechanical demands, resulting in the further development of physical ability (Hammami et al., 2017). The majority of youth today spend little time, if any, performing generalized, unstructured physical activity (play time) that facilitates the development of SAQ skills (Belton et al., 2014; Sokolove, 2008). Subsequently, fitness professionals can use play-style activities as a form of SAQ training. SAQ programs for youth have been found to decrease the likelihood of athletic injury (Drabik, 1996; Etty Griffin, 2003; Olsen et al., 2005; Ortega et al., 2008; Sokolove, 2008), increase the likelihood of exercise participation later in life (Janz et al., 2002; Wrotniak et al., 2006), and improve physical fitness (Balciunas et al., 2006; Ruiz et al., 2006).

Based on several research studies (Alp & Baydemir, 2019; Hammami et al., 2017; Ochi & Kovacs, 2016; Trecroci et al., 2016; Yankov, 2016), young athletes can perform SAQ training one to three times per week with four to eight drills per workout; one to four sets of each drill, with three to five repetitions and 15–60 seconds of rest is appropriate for most younger athletes (**Table 19-2**). Training should start at the lower end of these ranges with a primary focus on exercise technique; over many months, there should be a gradual progression to greater amounts of work with a focus on speed and technique. As with any fitness program, the quantity, frequency, and intensity of SAQ exercises should be appropriate and adjusted accordingly, based on the child’s physical fitness capabilities and maturity level.

**TABLE 19-2 SAQ Training for Youths**

| Frequency/Week | No. of Drills | Sets | Repetitions | Rest Periods |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1–3 | 4–8 | 1–4 | 3–5 | 15–60 seconds |

#### TRAINING TIP

In the beginning stages of training, children should be taught proper exercise technique and be allowed to practice SAQ drills. Once they become accustomed to completing four to five simple exercises once or twice per week, progression to more exercises accomplished two to three times per week can be incorporated over a few months. Shorter rest periods can be included as the child’s fitness improves, if speed and technique are maintained.

### EXAMPLE SAQ DRILLS FOR YOUTH POPULATIONS

**Red Light, Green Light**

	- Participants line up shoulder to shoulder along the base of a designated field, 20 yards (18 meters) long or longer.

	- One participant is chosen as the “stop light” and begins at the opposite end of the field.

	- The stop light turns their back to the other participants and calls “Green light.”

	- On calling green light, the participants all move as quickly as possible toward the stop light.

	- Still with their back to the group, the stop light yells “Red light!” and then immediately turns around.

	- On hearing “red light,” the participants are to stop movement and remain motionless, freezing with perfect stature, form, and control.

	- If the stop light sees anyone move, they call them to start over at the base of the field.

	- This is repeated at arbitrary intervals until a participant is able to reach and touch the stop light.

	- This participant then becomes the new stop light.

**Follow the Snake**

	- The instructor lays 5 to 10 jump ropes (or one long rope) on the ground in a random S-type pattern.

	- Participants line up on one side of the ropes; keeping a foot on each side of the rope, they follow the pattern of the rope first forward to the end, then backward to the beginning.

	- Participants can be timed to create a competition.