---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Progressive Adaptations from Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Muscular Hypertrophy

**Muscular hypertrophy** is the enlargement of skeletal muscle fibers in response to being recruited to develop increased levels of tension, as seen in resistance training (Schoenfeld, 2010). Muscle hypertrophy is characterized by an increase in the cross-sectional area of individual muscle fibers resulting from an increase in **myofibril** proteins, which are referenced in detail in Chapter 5, along with muscle fiber anatomy and function. Although the visible signs of hypertrophy may not be apparent for 4 to 8 weeks in an untrained client, the process begins in the early stages of training, regardless of the intensity of training used (Gabriel et al., 2006; Schoenfeld, Grgic, et al., 2017; Schoenfeld, Ogborn, et al., 2017).

Resistance training protocols that use a variety of repetition ranges, with progressive overload, lead to muscular hypertrophy. Structured progressive resistance training programs that use multiple sets lead to increased muscular hypertrophy in both younger and older men and women alike (Borde et al., 2015; Lasevicius et al., 2018; Schoenfeld, Ogborn, et al., 2016, 2017). Kraemer and colleagues (2004) demonstrated that 24 weeks of training for 3 days per week, with three sets of 8 to 12 repetitions per exercise, improved muscle hypertrophy and body composition. Thus, progressive resistance training programs using a variety of repetition protocols, with progressively higher loads and sets, will result in increased hypertrophy in adults.

## Strength

**Strength** is the ability of the neuromuscular system to produce internal tension, specifically in the muscles and connective tissues that pull on the bones, to overcome an external force. Whether the external force demands the neuromuscular system to produce stability, endurance, maximal strength, or power, internal tension within the muscles is what leads to force production. The degree of internal tension produced is the result of strength adaptations. The specific form of strength or internal tension, which is produced from training, is based on the type and intensity of training used by the client; this refers back to the principle of specificity.

It can be argued that resistance training programs have traditionally focused on developing maximal strength in individual muscles, emphasizing one plane of motion, typically the sagittal plane. Because all muscles function eccentrically, isometrically, and concentrically in all three planes of motion (sagittal, frontal, and transverse) and at different speeds, training programs should be designed using a progressive approach. This approach emphasizes appropriate exercise selection, multiple planes of motion, all muscle actions, and repetition tempos.

Because muscle operates under the control of the central nervous system, strength needs to be considered, not as a function of muscle but as a result of activating the neuromuscular (muscular + nervous) system. Strength gains can occur rapidly in beginning clients and can increase with a structured, progressive resistance training program. One factor in increased strength is an increase in the number of **motor units** recruited, especially early in a training program (Duchateau et al., 2006; Gabriel, 2006). Resistance training increases the neural demand and recruitment of more muscle fibers until a recruitment plateau is reached, after which further increases in strength are a result of muscle fiber hypertrophy (Evans, 2019; Lasevicius et al., 2018; Schoenfeld, 2010).

## Key Terms

**Muscular hypertrophy**
The enlargement of skeletal muscle fibers.

**Myofibrils**
The contractile components of a muscle cell; the myofilaments (actin and myosin) are contained within a myofibril.

**Strength**
The ability of the neuromuscular system to produce internal tension to overcome an external load.

**Motor unit**
A motor neuron and all of the muscle fibers that it innervates.