---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 14
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
To begin, resistance exercises should focus on optimizing ideal movement patterns. Once a client displays adequate movement competency, resistance training programs should progress in a systematic fashion using these three steps: (1) stabilization-focused exercises, (2) strength-focused exercises, and (3) power-focused exercises.

### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- The GAS model outlines three stages of response to stress: alarm reaction, resistance development, and exhaustion.

	- The alarm reaction stage, the initial reaction to a stressor, can include fatigue, joint stiffness, or delayed-onset muscle soreness.

	- The resistance development stage involves numerous physiological changes that ultimately lead to training adaptations that promote increases in performance.

	- Prolonged or intolerable amounts of stress lead to the exhaustion stage, which is characterized by stress fractures, muscle strains and ligament sprains, joint pain, and emotional fatigue.

	- The principle of specificity, often referred to as the SAID principle, describes the body’s responses and adaptations to exercise.

	- Mechanical specificity refers to the weight and movements placed on the body.

	- Neuromuscular specificity refers to the speed of contraction and exercise selection.

	- Metabolic specificity refers to the energy demand placed on the body.

	- The main adaptations that occur from resistance training include stabilization, muscular endurance, hypertrophy, strength, and power.

	- Stabilization is the body’s ability to provide optimal dynamic joint support to maintain correct posture during all movements.

	- Muscular endurance is the ability to produce and maintain force production for prolonged periods of time.

	- Muscular hypertrophy is the enlargement of skeletal muscle fibers.

	- Strength is the ability of the neuromuscular system to produce internal tension, specifically in the muscles and connective tissues that pull on the bones, to overcome an external force.

	- Power is the ability of the neuromuscular system to produce the greatest possible force in the shortest possible time.

	- Acute variables include repetitions, sets, training intensity, repetition tempo, rest intervals, training volume, training frequency, training duration, exercise selection, and exercise order.

	- There are numerous training systems that can be used to structure resistance training programs for a variety of effects. Several of the most common training systems include warm-up set, single set, multiple set, pyramid, superset, complex training, drop set, giant set, rest-pause set, circuit training, peripheral heart action, split routine, vertical loading, and horizontal loading.

	- Fitness professionals must safeguard their clients from harm. This requires maintaining a safe environment, ensuring proper equipment setup, using appropriate spotting procedures, and monitoring exercise technique using the five kinetic chain checkpoints.

	- Resistance exercises should initially focus on optimizing ideal movement patterns. Once a client displays adequate movement competency, resistance exercises should progress in a systematic fashion using three steps: (1) stabilization-focused exercises, (2) strength-focused exercises, and (3) power-focused exercises.