---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Introduction to Acute Variables
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### REPETITIONS

**Repetition** refers to the number of times an exercise is completed, for example, performing 15 repetitions of a biceps curl involves curling the weight upward for a total of 15 times. Repetitions are inversely related to the load lifted. For example, the heavier the load, the lower number of repetitions can be achieved. Repetitions can be categorized as low (1 to 5), moderate (6 to 12), and high (12+).

### SETS

A **set** describes a group of repetitions that are performed consecutively. The quantities of the other acute variables (i.e., repetitions and training intensity), as well as the fitness level of the client, determine the number of sets that an individual will perform. 

There is an inverse relationship between sets, repetitions, and intensity. The individual usually performs fewer sets when performing higher repetitions at a lower intensity (lighter weight) and more sets when performing lower repetitions at a higher intensity (heavier weight).

### TRAINING INTENSITY

**Training intensity** (i.e., load), as it relates to resistance training, has been shown to substantially influence muscle hypertrophy and is often argued as the single most important exercise variable for stimulating muscle mass (Schoenfeld, Grgic, et al., 2017). Although intensity can be described as simply the degree of effort involved with training, it is commonly expressed as a percentage of one repetition maximum (1RM) and equates to the number of repetitions that can be performed with a given weight.

A client’s physical capabilities, fitness level, nutritional status, and goals determine the quantity of repetitions, sets, and training intensity (**Table 20-3**).

**TABLE 20-3 Suggested Repetitions, Sets, and Training Intensity**

| Training Adaptation | Suggested Acute Variables* |
|---|---|
| Stabilization and muscular endurance | Moderate to high repetitions:  ~12–20 or higher
	Low to moderate sets: ~1–3 sets
	Low to moderate training intensities: ~50–70% 1RM |
| Muscular hypertrophy† | Low to moderate repetitions: ~6–12 or higher
	Moderate to high sets: ~3–6 sets
	Moderate to high training intensities: ~75–85% 1RM |
| Maximal strength | Low repetitions: ~1–5
	High sets: ~4–6 sets
	High training intensities: ~85–100% 1RM |
| Power | Low to moderate repetitions: ~1–10
	Moderate to high sets: ~3–6
	Low training intensities: ~10% of bodyweight (when using a medicine ball) or ~30–45% (when using weights) |

^*The acute variables listed in this table are not absolutes. A client’s training program, goals, and fitness level dictate appropriate acute variable selection.^

^† Muscle hypertrophy adaptations can be attained with various repetition, set, and intensity schemes depending on the total volume of training and the client’s fitness level (Borde et al., 2015; Lasevicius et al., 2018).^

#### HELPFUL HINT

Intensities (amount of weight) are generally expressed as a percentage of a one-repetition maximum (1RM), but 1RM testing can be challenging to do accurately. However, most repetition ranges for the fitness adaptation are inversely related to %1RM intensities.

For example, for stabilization and muscle endurance (50-70% 1RM intensity), if you can complete 20 reps, with the final rep being challenging, you can assume you are near 50% of your 1RM at that weight. On the other hand, if form begins to break down at 12 reps, then you can assume the weight is at or near 70% of your 1RM for that exercise.

So to keep things simple, you may often see intensity expressed as something like "12 RM" to reflect the rep range that equates to the desired intensity. To begin, find a weight you can comfortably do the lift at for 12 repetitions, then progress accordingly from there.

## Key Terms

**Repetition**
One complete movement of an exercise.

**Set**
A group of consecutive repetitions.

**Training intensity**
An individual’s level of effort compared with their maximal effort, which is usually expressed as a percentage.