---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Resistance Training Systems
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
The explanation for this phenomenon is known as **post-activation potentiation (PAP**) and is the primary method on which complex training is based. Post-activation potentiation refers to the condition by which acute muscle-force generation is increased as a result of the inner contractions of the muscle. In other words, a person displays an increase in muscular force that is caused by the excitation of the nervous system, which was created by the heavy loads lifted (Alves et al., 2019; Conrado de Freitas et al., 2018).

Complex training is volume dependent, meaning that it is necessary to complete sufficient sets to stimulate the neuromuscular system (e.g., three to five sets or more). Due to the high-stress nature of complex training, the neuromuscular system needs about 72 hours for complete recovery. Considering this, Certified Personal Trainers should consider limiting the implementation of complex training to two to four sessions per week, depending on their client’s training split.

## Drop Sets

A drop set is a resistance training system that is popular among bodybuilders and strength athletes. It is a system that enables an individual to continue a set past the point at which it would usually terminate. Drop sets involve performing a set to failure, then removing a small percentage of the load (typically 5–20%) and continuing with the set, completing a small number of repetitions (usually 2–4). This procedure can be repeated several times (typically 2–3 drops per set). A set to failure followed by three successive load decrements performed with no rest would be referred to as a triple drop. Drop sets are considered an advanced form of resistance training suitable for experienced lifters.

## Giant Set

Giant sets, while very similar to supersets, are comprised of four or more exercises completed in succession. When performing giant sets, it is best for the Certified Personal Trainer to focus on one muscle group at a time, with three or more exercises corresponding to 8 to 12 repetitions. The rest interval is fairly short with approximately 5 to 15 seconds between exercises and several minutes (e.g., 2–5) between giant sets. It is important to note that the fitness professional might not be working the muscle in the exact same manner, variation, or angle; therefore, it is best to choose a weight that is challenging while allowing the individual to complete the necessary repetitions. For example, a chest giant set might consist of 10 repetitions of flat dumbbell chest presses, 10 repetitions of incline dumbbell presses, 10 repetitions of decline bench presses, and 10 repetitions of dumbbell pec flys. The Certified Personal Trainer should customize the giant set to their client’s goals and ability level. Giant sets have been shown to improve the weight lifted during one-rep maximum, peak, and shuttle-run performances, as well as improve lean muscle mass (Alcaraz et al., 2011).

## Rest-Pause Set

Rest-pause training is a popular style that typically employs moderate to heavy loading with a short rest interval, allowing clients to develop as much of a stimulus as possible in minimal time. Rest-pause is a productive method of training to increase time under tension and metabolic stress, especially in recreationally trained persons (Prestes et al., 2019).

To perform a rest-pause set, the fitness professional would instruct their client to engage in the following sequence:

	- Perform a set for a specific amount of repetitions.

	- Set the weight down and take several deep breaths, then complete the subsequent repetitions to muscular failure.

	- Complete the second step as many times as possible.

## Key Terms

**Post-activation potentiation (PAP)**
The phenomenon by which acute muscle force generation is increased as a result of the inner contraction of the muscle.