---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Introduction to Acute Variables
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### REPETITION TEMPO

**Repetition tempo** relates to the rate at which each repetition is performed. Studies have analyzed the effects of movement tempo on adaptive processes in terms of strength, muscle power, or muscle hypertrophy (Golas et al., 2016; Wilk, Golas, et al., 2018; Wilk, Stastny, et al. 2018). Each of the forms of resistance training has been shown to lead to hypertrophy or an increase in muscle strength (Schoenfeld, Grgic, et al., 2017). A slower movement cadence is often used to stimulate muscle hypertrophy since faster uncontrolled speeds are typically employed to develop strength and power. Slower tempos are also used for the development of stabilization and muscular endurance.

The following practical example will help the fitness professional understand how to read and interpret repetition tempo. A repetition tempo uses a four-number system. Each number corresponds to the length of time (in seconds) to perform a specific muscle action (eccentric, isometric, concentric). The numbers are also listed in the following named order regardless of the way in which the exercise is performed: eccentric/isometric/concentric/isometric. For example, a push-up using a 4-2-1-1 tempo involves the following:

	- Lowering the body toward the floor for 4 seconds (eccentric action)

	- Pausing the body with the chest slightly above the floor for 2 seconds (isometric contraction)

	- Pushing upwards and returning to the top position in 1 second (concentric contraction)

	- Pausing at the top position for 1 second before repeating the next repetition (isometric contraction)

A barbell biceps curl using a 3-0-1-2 tempo involves the following:

	- Curling up the barbell for 1 second (concentric contraction)

	- Pausing at the top for 2 seconds (isometric contraction)

	- Lowering the barbell for 3 seconds (eccentric action)

	- Pausing at the bottom position for 0 seconds before repeating the next repetition (isometric contraction)

#### HELPFUL HINT

Repetition tempos use the same four-numbered sequence no matter if the exercise first starts with an eccentric movement, like a squat or bench press, or a concentric movement, like a biceps curl or shoulder press.

## Key Terms

**Repetition tempo**
The speed at which each repetition is performed.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH20_BOXHH02_01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533