---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Program Design
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
The fitness professional can use this method with new or experienced exercisers because it is simple and easy to follow. With this approach, the load and intensities used within the program increase in a systematic fashion. **Table 21-1**provides one example of using linear periodization to progressively increase training loads; however, many variations exist.

**TABLE 21-1: Example Linear Load Progression**

| Timeframe | Intensity: 1-Repetition Maximum (1RM) |
|---|---|
| Weeks 1 to 4: Stability and muscular endurance | Light to moderate loads: 60–70% of 1RM |
| Weeks 5 to 8: Hypertrophy and strength | Moderate to heavy loads: 70–85% of 1RM |
| Weeks 9 to 12: Maximal strength | Heavy to maximal loads: 85–100% 1RM |

It is important to recognize that linear periodization schemes can modify more than load/intensity and can also manipulate exercise selection, rest periods, and volume (sets + reps) to progress exercise programs. This is an important consideration for those with goals other than strength and hypertrophy, such as those seeking weight loss or endurance athletes seeking improvements in aerobic capacity.

### UNDULATING PERIODIZATION

**Undulating periodization**, or nonlinear periodization, uses changes in volume, intensity, and exercise selection to provide loading differences on a daily or weekly basis (Caldas et al., 2016; Painter et al., 2018; Ullrich et al., 2016). This form of periodization is mentally beneficial because the workouts do not become stale or boring. Fitness professionals can also be a little more creative in their approach because multiple training protocols can be used all in the same week. For example, a fitness professional can assign a muscular endurance–focused workout on Monday, a power-focused workout on Wednesday, and a hypertrophy-focused workout on Friday. Using this method, multiple styles of training are performed within the same week (**Table 21: -2**). Because of these daily changes, the stress on the body is constantly varied, which limits the client’s ability to plateau in their performance (Jaimes et al., 2019).

Both linear and undulating periodization will be discussed in terms of the OPT model later in this chapter.

**TABLE 21-2: Example Undulating Periodization**

| Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | Thursday | Friday |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Muscular endurance–focused workout |  | Power-focused workout |  | Hypertrophy-focused workout |

## Key Terms

**Undulating periodization**
A programming scheme, also known as nonlinear periodization, that uses changes in volume, intensity, and exercise selection to provide loading differences on a daily or weekly basis.