---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Power
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Power

The third level of the OPT model, power, is designed to increase the rate of force production (or speed of muscle contraction). This form of training uses the adaptations of stabilization and strength acquired in the previous phases of training and applies them at more realistic speeds and forces that the body will encounter in everyday life and in sports.

Power training is usually not a common practice in the fitness environment, but it has a viable and purposeful place in a properly planned training program. Power is defined as force multiplied by velocity (*P = F × V*). Therefore, any increase in either force or velocity will produce an increase in power. This is accomplished by either increasing the load (or force) as in progressive strength training or increasing the speed with which a load is moved (or velocity). The combined effect is a better rate of force production in both daily and sporting activities.

To develop optimal levels of power, individuals should train with both heavy loads (85% to 100% intensity or one to five repetition maximum [RM]) and light loads (30% to 45% intensity or 8 to 10 RM) at high speeds. The focus of power training is to increase the rate of force production by increasing the number of motor units activated, the synchrony between them, and the speed at which they are excited (Freitas et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019; Santos & Janeira, 2008). A client in this category will generally stay in this phase of training for a 2- to 6-week duration before cycling back through earlier phases, but this is highly dependent on the client’s training goals or athletic competitive schedule.

The power level of the OPT model consists of one phase of training: Phase 5 Power Training.

## Designing Power Level Programs

Like previous phases of the OPT model, Phase 5 uses the same workout template; yet, the acute training variables and exercise selections focus on enhancing muscular power.

### POWER LEVEL WARM-UP

The flexibility techniques used in Phase 5 include self-myofascial techniques and dynamic stretching. Choose one to three muscle groups and hold on each tender area for a minimum of 30 seconds when performing self-myofascial techniques. After completing self-myofascial techniques, the next step is to perform dynamic stretching. Choose between 3 and 10 dynamic stretches using a repetition range of 10 to 15.

Cardiorespiratory exercise is not needed during a Phase 5 warm-up because dynamic stretching serves as a **specific warm-up** and adequately prepares tissues for the upcoming demands of the workout.

#### HELPFUL HINT

A Phase 5 flexibility routine does not typically involve static or active stretching. Instead, only self-myofascial techniques and dynamic stretching are performed. However, if a client or athlete displays limited mobility or muscle imbalances, static or active stretching can be included prior to performing dynamic stretching.

## Key Terms

**Specific warm-up**
Low-intensity exercise consisting of movements that mimic those to be included in the more intense exercise immediately following.