---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Similar to core training, balance training exercises must be systematic and progressive. Fitness professionals should follow specific program guidelines, proper exercise selection criteria, and detailed program variables. The main goal of balance training is to continually increase the client’s awareness of their limit of stability by creating controlled instability. Not following the proper progression can cause movement compensations and improper execution of the exercise, decreasing the effectiveness of the exercise and increasing the risk for injury.

When introducing balance exercises into a Phase 1 exercise program, the exercises should initially involve little joint motion of the balance leg. These entry-level balance exercises are designed to improve reflexive (automatic) joint stabilization contractions to increase joint stability. Like core training, choose between one and four balance exercises with a repetition range of 12 to 20 (6 to 10 repetitions on each leg) using a slow repetition tempo and one to three sets.

#### TRAINING TIP

Balance exercises that involve little joint motion of the balance leg and are ideal for a Phase 1 program include (but are not limited to) the following: tandem stance, single-leg balance, single-leg balance reach, single-leg hip internal and external rotation, single-leg lift and chop, single-leg arm and leg motion, single-leg windmill, and single-leg throw and catch. Balance exercises do not require the use of a balance modality (i.e., balance disc, foam pad, or wobble board) to provide adequate stimulus. However, these modalities can be a viable option for more advanced clients.

### STABILIZATION LEVEL SKILL DEVELOPMENT

During the skill development section, the fitness professional can either program plyometric and SAQ exercises or provide instruction for basic movement patterns and how to use exercise equipment. This choice is dependent on the skill and fitness level of the client and is up to the fitness professional’s discretion.

Clients with modest fitness experience can safely perform plyometric and SAQ exercises; however, these exercises are optional. When introducing plyometric exercises, the movements should initially involve small jumps (lower amplitude) to best learn the movement pattern. When a client lands, they should hold the landing position for 3 to 5 seconds. During this time, the client should make any adjustments necessary to correct faulty postures before performing the next jump. Choose between one and three plyometric exercises with a repetition range of five to eight and perform for one to three sets.

#### TRAINING TIP

Example exercises using this protocol include (but are not limited to) the following: squat jump with stabilization, box jump-up with stabilization, box jump-down with stabilization, and multiplanar jump with stabilization.

Like plyometric training, the safety and success of SAQ exercises is dependent on the physical capabilities and fitness level of the client. The better a fitness professional can match drills appropriate to a client’s capabilities, the safer and more effective the program will be. All exercises should be performed with precise technique to minimize risk of injury. Choose between four and six SAQ exercises, such as ladder drills and cone drills, with a repetition range of two to three for one to two sets. 

#### TRAINING TIP

Example exercises using this protocol include (but are not limited to) the following: speed ladder drills, such as one-ins, two-ins, side shuffle, in-in-out-out, zig-zag, and Ali shuffle. Cone drills, such as a 5-10-5 drill, T-drill, box drill, modified box drill, and LEFT drill are also appropriate.