---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
### SKILL DEVELOPMENT

The Skill Development section is an optional portion of the workout, but it can be valuable for many clients and athletes, depending on their goals and fitness level. Within this section, the fitness professional will assign plyometric and SAQ exercises. These forms of exercise further develop an individual’s agility, reaction time, and overall athleticism (Makhlouf et al., 2018; Oxfeldt et al., 2019). In addition, plyometric and SAQ training are effective modes of exercise to improve aerobic capacity and can serve as a substitute for traditional steady-state cardiorespiratory exercise, if desired.

Fitness professionals also have the option of foregoing plyometric and SAQ exercises, choosing to substitute specialized instruction for skill acquisition. For example, clients new to exercise should be instructed on how to perfect basic movement patterns, such as pushing, pulling, pressing, squatting, hip hinging, and multiplanar movements. Instruction for exercise equipment can also be included in this section of the workout template.

For more advanced clients, this portion of the workout can be used to introduce advanced forms of exercise like Olympic weightlifting or martial arts drills. It is important to note, this section is dedicated to the instruction and practice of new skills, not high-intensity work. Clients new to Olympic weightlifting, for example, can practice with a dowel rod or a similar implement until they learn the basic movement patterns. Clients new to martial arts will be able to practice punching and kicking drills with proper form before using these techniques in a high-intensity fashion later in their programming.

### RESISTANCE TRAINING

Resistance exercises are an essential component of any exercise training program. Resistance training is beneficial for developing joint and core stability, muscular endurance, hypertrophy, strength, power, and athleticism. In addition, resistance exercises can be an effective mode for increasing lean muscle mass, reducing body fat, and improving numerous health markers (Ciolac & Rodrigues-da-Silva, 2016; Schoenfeld et al., 2016; Westcott, 2012).

Programming resistance training exercises must be purposeful and progressive. Consequently, fitness professionals should follow specific program guidelines, including proper exercise selection criteria and milestones for progression. The OPT model has specific parameters for each phase of training, including the types of resistance exercise selected and appropriate acute variables, which will be discussed later in this chapter.