---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Strength Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Strength Level of OPT Model

The second level of training in the OPT model focuses on the main adaptation of strength. While there are many types of strength, the OPT model emphasizes improvements in strength endurance, muscular development, and maximal strength. It is designed to maintain stability while increasing the amount of stress placed on the body for increased muscle size, strength, and work capacity. This period of training is a necessary progression from stabilization for anyone who desires to increase caloric expenditure, muscle size, muscle strength, and bone mineral density. The strength level of training focuses on the following:

	- Increasing the ability of the core musculature to stabilize the pelvis and spine under heavier loads, through greater ranges of motion

	- Increasing the load-bearing capabilities of muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joints

	- Increasing the volume of training

	- Increasing metabolic demand by taxing the phosphocreatine (ATP-PC) and glycolytic energy systems to induce cellular changes in muscle

	- Increasing recruitment of more motor units to overcome an external load (maximal strength)

The strength level of training in the OPT model consists of three phases: Phase 2 Strength Endurance Training, Phase 3 Muscular Development Training, and Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training.

## Phase 2 Strength Endurance Training

Phase 2 Strength Endurance Training is a hybrid form of training that promotes increased stabilization endurance, hypertrophy, and strength. The unique aspect of this phase of training is that it entails the use of superset techniques in which a more strength-focused exercise (such as a bench press) is immediately followed with a stabilization-focused exercise with similar biomechanical motions (such as a push-up). Thus, for every set of an exercise performed, there are actually two exercises being completed. High amounts of volume can be generated in this phase of training.

Similar to Phase 1, Phase 2 acute variables can be progressed by increasing proprioceptive demand (instability), volume (sets or reps), and intensity (load, exercise selection, or planes of motion) and by decreasing rest periods. Clients can spend anywhere from 2 to 6 weeks in this phase of training, depending on their goals, fitness level, and training schedule.

## Phase 3 Muscular Development Training

Phase 3 Muscular Development Training is specific for the adaptation of maximal muscle growth, focusing on high levels of volume to force cellular changes that result in an overall increase in muscle size.

Because the goal of this phase of training is primarily hypertrophy, the fitness professional will want to increase volume and intensity of the program. A client in this category will generally stay in this phase of training for a 2- to 6-week duration before cycling back through Phase 1 or 2 or progressing on to Phase 4 or 5.

Some clients may not wish to increase muscular hypertrophy, such as endurance athletes, and, therefore, this phase is optional. However, Phase 3 can be used to meet many goals beyond hypertrophy because the acute variables can be manipulated to increase stress on aerobic and anaerobic energy systems. For example, a Phase 3 program can limit rest periods, so the workout becomes more metabolically demanding, which is ideal for weight loss and cardiorespiratory conditioning.