---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
### CLIENT'S CHOICE

Arguably the most important consideration when developing exercise programs is to ensure client adherence. Fitness professionals can have a significant influence on their client’s health, body composition, and athletic performance. Therefore, the fitness professional has a responsibility to create an environment that helps the client adhere to a fitness routine. They should help clients feel confident and competent while preserving their **autonomy **to do exercises that they enjoy. **Self-efficacy** is a well-established determinant of exercise behavior, so to promote changes that increase exercise adherence, a behavior change technique that influences self-efficacy should be used. This is the basis for the Client’s Choice section of the workout template.

In this section, the client chooses a few of their favorite exercises to include in the program. Some clients may choose to perform strength-training exercises for their arms for aesthetic purposes. Other clients may opt for additional abdominal exercises or accessory lifts depending on their likes and dislikes. Fitness professionals should encourage clients to choose a few (typically one or two) of their favorite exercises and only intervene if the chosen exercise is unsafe.

### COOL-DOWN

A cool-down provides the body with a smooth transition from exercise back to a steady state of rest. The goal of a cool-down is to reduce heart and breathing rates, gradually cool body temperature, return muscles to their optimal resting lengths, prevent pooling of blood in the lower extremities, and restore body systems close to baseline.

Light cardiorespiratory exercise is an optional component of the cool-down. When implementing cardio, the client should gradually reduce speed and intensity until they are walking at a comfortable pace. A cardiorespiratory cool-down typically lasts for 5 to 10 minutes.

Once complete, the client should perform self-myofascial techniques and static stretching to reset muscles back to their normal** length-tension relationships**. Flexibility techniques are an important component of a cool-down and should not be overlooked or skipped as they can reduce effects associated with delayed-onset muscle soreness, enhance recovery from exercise, and set up the body for enhanced performance in subsequent training sessions (Pearcey et al., 2015).

## Key Terms

**Autonomy**
Acting in accordance with how one wants to behave.

**Self-efficacy**
One’s belief that he or she can complete a task, goal, or performance; also known as self-confidence.

**Length-tension relationship**
The resting length of a muscle and the tension the muscle can produce at this resting length.