---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Another example includes progressing exercises from a stable seated position to a standing position or even a single-leg stance. This form of progression requires clients to stabilize their trunk and peripheral joints (ankles, knees, hips, and shoulders) while performing functional movement patterns. Consequently, this creates a greater demand on the core musculature and balance mechanisms during exercise (Behm et al., 2002, 2010; Behm & Anderson, 2006; Willardson, 2007). Proprioceptive (unstable, yet controllable) training has been shown in research as an effective form of exercise to reduce the risk of injury (de Vasconcelos et al., 2018; Riva et al., 2016, Rivera et al., 2017; Verhagen et al., 2004). It is important to note that the level of instability should be client specific, and fitness professionals should always err on the side of caution when increasing the proprioceptive demand of exercises.

Although this is the first phase of training in the OPT model, it will also be important to cycle back through this phase between periods of higher-intensity training seen in Phases 2 through 5. This will allow for proper recovery and maintenance of high levels of stability that will ensure optimal adaptations for strength or power or both.

In addition to increasing proprioceptive demand, acute variables can be progressed by increasing the volume (sets or reps) and intensity (load, exercise selection, or planes of motion) and by decreasing rest periods based on client’s rating of perceived exertion. It is important to keep in mind that the intensity and difficulty of exercises should be client specific. Fitness professionals need to design exercise programs that match their client’s current capabilities and fitness level.

To recap, Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training focuses on the following:

	- Teaching ideal movement patterns and exercise skills

	- Increasing flexibility and joint mobility

	- Correcting identified muscle imbalances based on assessment results

	- Increasing joint and core stability

	- Improving muscular endurance and aerobic capacity

	- Enhancing proprioception, balance, and overall coordination

	- Promoting client confidence and adherence to exercise

## Designing a Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance  Training Program

As a reminder, daily OPT exercise programs include several sections: Warm-Up, Activation, Skill Development, Resistance Training, Client’s Choice, and Cool-Down. Each section is included in the workout to elicit a specific physical, neurological, or psychological adaptation. Note that not all sections must be included in a client’s workout, especially when limited time is a factor. It is up to the fitness professional’s discretion as to which sections are most important based on the client’s goals, needs, and abilities.

### STABILIZATION LEVEL WARM-UP

The flexibility techniques used within Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training include (1) self-myofascial techniques, such as foam rolling; (2), static stretching; and (3) optional dynamic stretching.

When performing self-myofascial techniques, choose one to three muscle groups to target and hold on each tender area for a minimum of 30 seconds to elicit an optimal relaxation response. Refer to Chapter 14 Flexibility Training Concepts for more information on how to perform self-myofascial techniques.