---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
#### MULTIPLANAR MOVEMENT

Activities of daily living and sport activities occur in all three planes of motion: sagittal, frontal, and transverse. However, the majority of traditional fitness programs overemphasize exercises in the sagittal plane with a primary emphasis on concentric force production. If everyday movement and sport is multiplanar, then fitness professionals should integrate multiplanar exercises to maximize the transfer-of-training effect. In other words, the more similarity that exists from the training program to movement patterns, the greater the effect and transfer to sport-related and daily-living activities. Training only in the sagittal plane will not provide clients with the motor learning opportunities to effectively move in all planes of motion.

In addition, many lower-extremity noncontact injuries occur in the frontal and transverse planes of motion (Padua et al., 2018; Quatman et al., 2010). Therefore, programming a variety of exercises in all planes of motion is a critical component of a client’s training program to reduce the likelihood of injury.

### INCREASING PROPRIOCEPTIVE DEMANDS

After a client acquires basic movement proficiency and has become accustomed to various exercise equipment, the focus of a Phase 1 program shifts to improving a client’s core and joint stability and posture. This is accomplished by increasing the proprioceptive demand of exercises. In other words, exercise progressions require greater focus on maintaining ideal postural control and balance rather than increasing external load. A common example is a client progressing from using selectorized machines to barbells, dumbbells, and other forms of free weights.