---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
### STABILIZATION LEVEL RESISTANCE TRAINING

The resistance training techniques used in Phase 1 should focus on improving the movement patterns previously discussed. In addition, resistance training in this phase should aim to increase postural control, mobility and stability of the core and peripheral joints, and overall muscular endurance. This requires the use of strength-training exercises performed in a controlled, yet progressively unstable, environment.

Acute variables include performing one to three sets for 12 to 20 repetitions with a slow repetition tempo for each exercise. Like core and balance exercises, an example slow repetition tempo during resistance training is 4-2-1-1 (4-second eccentric action; 2-second isometric hold; 1-second concentric contraction; 1-second isometric hold). The aim of Phase 1 resistance training exercises is to adequately prepare muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joints for higher loads used later in the OPT model and to promote ideal joint stability, muscular endurance, and **neuromuscular efficiency**.

#### TRAINING TIP

Stabilization-focused resistance exercises require clients to support their posture with their core and joint stabilizers versus relying on artificial support, such as a bench or machine. This typically takes form as standing or single-leg stance exercises. Balance modalities, such as the inclusion of stability balls and other implements, are also an option. However, the amount of instability should be client specific based on their physical capabilities.

### STABILIZATION LEVEL CLIENT'S CHOICE

In this section of the workout, clients are allowed to choose their own exercises. In most cases, one or two client-choice exercises will suffice. This portion of the workout provides a unique and fun characteristic to the exercise program. The aim is to increase exercise adherence and self-efficacy for clients. Any type of exercise is permitted in this section as long as it is deemed safe and appropriate.

### STABILIZATION LEVEL COOL-DOWN

The cool-down portion should last between 5 and 10 minutes and include, in the following order, (1) optional cardiorespiratory exercise, (2) self-myofascial techniques, and (3) static stretching. When executing self-myofascial techniques, such as foam rolling, choose 1 to 3 muscle groups and hold on each tender area for a minimum of 30 seconds to elicit an optimal relaxation response. This will be followed by static stretching for the same muscle groups.

## Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training  Synopsis

**Table 21: -9** provides a complete overview of Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training. Note that cardiorespiratory exercise is not included in the chart but can be integrated anytime within an OPT workout or performed separately.

**

## Key Terms

**Neuromuscular efficiency**
The ability of the nervous system to recruit the correct muscles to produce force, reduce force, and dynamically stabilize the body’s structure in all three planes of motion.

## Images

**Table 21-9: provides a complete overview of Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training. Note that cardiorespiratory exercise is not included in the chart but can be integrated anytime within an OPT workout or performed separately.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20NASM_CPT_Ch21_Table_21.9.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Table 21-9: provides a complete overview of Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training. Note that cardiorespiratory exercise is not included in the chart but can be integrated anytime within an OPT workout or performed separately.**
Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_animation_opt_phase_1.jpeg