---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Strength Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
An example of a moderate repetition tempo is 2-0-2-0 (2-second eccentric action; 0-second isometric hold; 2-second concentric contraction; 0-second isometric hold).

While it is recommended to incorporate more progressive exercises in these phases, the fitness professional has the discretion to include core exercises used in Phase 1, if deemed important and appropriate, such as the client needing additional work to improve intervertebral stability.

#### TRAINING TIP

Core exercises that involve flexion, extension, and rotation of the spine that are appropriate for this level of training include (but are not limited to) floor crunches, ball crunches, back extensions, reverse crunches, knee-ups, cable rotations, cable lifts, and cable chops.

The next progression for balance exercises is to involve dynamic eccentric and concentric movement of the balance leg, through a full range of motion. Movements require dynamic control in the midrange of motion, with isometric stabilization at the end range of motion. The speed and neural demand of each exercise are also progressed. Choose between one and four balance exercises using a repetition range of 8 to 12 using a moderate repetition tempo and two to four sets. However, the fitness professional has the discretion to include balance exercises used in Phase 1, if deemed important and appropriate, such as the client needing additional work to maintain proper lower extremity and trunk alignment and control while on a single leg.

#### TRAINING TIP

Sample balance exercises following this protocol include (but are not limited to) single-leg squat, single-leg squat touchdown, single-leg Romanian deadlift, multiplanar step-up to balance, and multiplanar lunge to balance.

### STRENGTH LEVEL SKILL DEVELOPMENT

During the skill development section, fitness professionals can choose to either program plyometric and SAQ exercises or provide instruction for alternative forms of exercise, such as Olympic weightlifting, powerlifting, or martial arts drills. This choice is dependent on the expertise of the fitness professional and goals of the client.

If implementing plyometric training, the exercises should be a progression from Phase 1 and involve jumps with more amplitude and dynamic motion. These exercises are performed in a repetitive fashion, spending a relatively short amount of time on the ground before repeating the drill. In other words, the client will no longer hold the landing position for 3 to 5 seconds but instead initiate another jump on landing. Select between one and four plyometric exercises with a repetition range of 8 to 12 and perform for two to four sets.

However, the fitness professional has the discretion to include or substitute plyometric exercises used in Phase 1, if deemed important, particularly if the client is having difficulty performing more advanced forms of plyometric training and needs more practice.

Like plyometric training, SAQ exercises are dependent on the physical capabilities and goals of the client. SAQ exercises are optional during the strength level of the OPT model, but they can be a valuable mode of exercise for those seeking improvements in speed, reaction time, coordination, and anaerobic conditioning.