---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Power
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
### POWER LEVEL ACTIVATION

Like the stabilization and strength levels of the OPT model, the activation techniques used in Phase 5 include core and balance exercises. However, because most of these exercises can be programmed during the resistance training section of the workout, core and balance exercises are optional during the activation section.

If core exercises are programmed, they should involve explosive movements designed to increase rate of force production of the core musculature through a full range of motion. Choose between one and two core exercises using a repetition range of 8 to 12 with an explosive tempo and one to three sets. However, the fitness professional has the discretion to include or substitute core exercises used in previous phases, if deemed important and appropriate, such as the client needing additional work to improve intervertebral stability or rotational core strength.

#### TRAINING TIP

The last progression includes core exercises that are designed to improve power of the core musculature. Example exercises include (but are not limited to) medicine ball rotation chest pass, ball medicine ball pullover throw, front medicine ball oblique throw, side medicine ball oblique throw, medicine ball soccer throw, medicine ball overhead throw, and medicine ball woodchop throw.

Balance exercises used in Phase 5 are a progression from previous phases and are designed to develop proper deceleration ability to move the body from a dynamic state to a controlled stationary position. In other words, these exercises combine hopping motions with a single-leg stance landing. The landing position is held for 3 to 5 seconds.

#### TRAINING TIP

Example balance exercises that focus on eccentric control and deceleration include (but are not limited to) multiplanar hop with stabilization, multiplanar single-leg box hop-up with stabilization, and multiplanar single-leg box hop-down with stabilization.

### POWER LEVEL SKILL DEVELOPMENT

Similar to previous phases of the OPT model, the skill development section is reserved for either plyometric and SAQ exercises or providing instruction for alternative forms of exercise. The decision should be based on the goals, needs, and abilities of the client. In addition, because power-based movements are performed during the resistance training portion of the workout, plyometric and SAQ exercises are optional in this section of the workout.

If implementing plyometric training, the exercises should be a progression from Phases 2 through 4 and involve explosive, powerful movements. These exercises are designed to further improve the rate of force production and eccentric strength of the entire kinetic chain. Choose between one and four plyometric exercises with a repetition range of 8 to 12 and three to five sets. However, the fitness professional has the discretion to include or substitute plyometric exercises used in earlier phases, if deemed important and appropriate.

Similar to plyometric training, SAQ exercises are dependent on the physical capabilities and goals of the client. SAQ exercises are optional during a Phase 5 workout, but they are a valuable mode of exercise for those seeking improvements in speed, power, and overall enhanced athleticism.