---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Trackers
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
This can be especially important for those who are trying to lose weight, build muscle, or improve athletic performance.

Nutritional apps are beneficial for the following reasons:

	-  Meal planning

	- Understanding and counting calories

	- Reading and understanding food labels

	- Tracking macronutrient intake (protein, carbohydrates, fat)

	- Tracking nutritional content (e.g., vitamins, minerals, fiber)

	- Making healthier food choices

	- Fueling workouts

	- Finding recipes

	- Forming positive eating habits

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Not all nutritional bars are nutritious for you. Some have more sugar and fat than many candy bars.

### FITNESS APPS

Fitness apps are downloadable applications that can be used on nearly any mobile device and designed to help users obtain certain fitness goals. A fitness app is an inexpensive and convenient way for fitness enthusiasts to take their workouts with them and include a variety of exercise formats, including high-intensity interval-training, strength training, yoga, and Pilates. The benefits of fitness apps include the following:

	-  Access to exercise routines anytime or anywhere with a computer, tablet, or smartphone

	- Personalized fitness programs based on the user’s goals and exercise preferences

	- Access to exercise programs that do not require equipment

	- Tracking completed workouts and time spent exercising

	- Daily, weekly, and monthly reminders to complete workout routines

	- Simulation of 1-on-1 or group training

	- Tracking steps taken each day

	- Tracking calories expended from physical activity

	- Tracking fitness achievements like miles run or weight lifted

	-  Instructing proper exercise technique

There are several fitness apps on the market today, and many have free trial periods. Individuals can test several applications to determine which app best fits their needs. It is important to remember that individuals with chronic disease may need medical clearance before starting a new exercise routine. In addition, performing exercise routines without supervision can be dangerous, especially for those new to exercise.

## Heart Rate Monitors

Heart rate monitors (HRM) have become very popular within the fitness industry. Traditionally, they were used by endurance athletes, such as runners and triathletes, to monitor training levels. However, HRMs have become more widely used within mainstream fitness.