---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

The objective of this chapter was to introduce the fitness professional to a variety of exercise modalities and their uses. There are several types of exercise modalities, including resistance training modalities, proprioceptive modalities, and trackers.

Resistance training modalities come in many forms, such as selectorized machines, free weights, cable machines, elastic resistance, medicine balls, kettlebells, suspension bodyweight trainers, sandbags, ViPR, and battle ropes. Proprioceptive modalities, such as stability balls, BOSU balls, and the Terra-Core, are beneficial for introducing instability to exercises, which can enhance balance, coordination, and joint stability. The popularity of trackers, including heart rate monitors, and nutrition and fitness apps provide additional means of accountability, motivation, consistency, and safety. These apps may enable the Certified Personal Trainer a more effective method of helping their clients achieve their fitness goals.

However, it is the responsibility of the fitness professional to be well versed in as many fitness modalities as possible. By having a better understanding of each of these modalities, the Certified Personal Trainer is better able to design a versatile, efficient, and functional program for their clients.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

It is imperative to a fitness professional’s success within the health and fitness industry to properly understand how to incorporate the variety of resistance training modalities discussed in this chapter. While each modality discussed in this chapter plays a vital role in all phases of the OPT model, it is the responsibility of the Certified Personal Trainer to know how and when to implement each modality. By better understanding the needs and limitations of each client, the fitness professional can design a goal-specific program that includes all of the modalities proficiently.

Machines may be ideal for developing muscular strength in targeted muscle groups and are often the first choice for the novice, deconditioned, or older adult. It is important to remember that most selectorized machines require less activation of the core musculature than free weights and rarely allow for total-body movements. Conversely, free-weight exercises can be performed through a greater range of motion and in all planes of motion, yet there is an intimidation factor as well as a learning curve for many of these modalities. Cable machines, elastic resistance, and the TRX Rip Trainer provide multidirectional load resistance similar to free weights and have proven to be beneficial in developing core strength.

Balance modalities are a great addition to any program, as they can improve ankle stability, posture, and balance. But, they also include an inherent danger due to risk of falling. It is the duty of the Certified Personal Trainer to ensure that proper form and exercise technique is maintained throughout every exercise.

Technological devices, such as fitness and nutrition apps and heart rate monitors, can help increase motivation, accountability, and athletic performance. These devices, though helpful, are not always 100% accurate. For example, research has indicated that wrist-worn heart rate monitors are less accurate than chest strap monitors, especially during upper body exercise. Regardless, these devices are still good additions to any well-designed program, especially to monitor and track exercise effort.