---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Exercise modalities are tools that are designed to enhance an exercise or movement to create a desired outcome.

	- There are many types of exercise modalities, including resistance training equipment, balance tools, and fitness trackers.

	- It is important to keep safety and effectiveness in mind when deciding which training modalities may be the best to use and when to integrate them into a program.

	- Because most novice exercisers lack resistance training experience, strength-training machines may offer a safer and effective option to free weights. Strength-training machines, however, are regarded as inferior to free weights for improving core stability and muscular coordination, as they offer artificial support instead of using one’s core musculature.

	- Free weights can be used by most populations, in a variety of fashions, for many goals, and in all phases of the OPT model. Although extremely versatile, free weights can be intimidating for some clients.

	- Cable machines can provide greater ROM when compared to selectorized strength equipment. When using cable machines, it is important to match the cable’s resistance to the muscle’s natural line of pull.

	- Elastic bands and tubing also allow clients to perform resisted exercises that mimic sport-specific movements, such as a golf swing or tennis forehand. Elastic resistance is portable and inexpensive but may not be ideal when trying to develop high levels of strength and muscular hypertrophy.

	- Medicine balls can be used like other resistance implements to add load or instability to an exercise. Medicine balls can be used with a variety of populations as part of a program to increase muscular strength, endurance, and power, or in some cases, to help rehabilitate from injury.

	- A kettlebell differs from a dumbbell, barbell, or medicine ball in that the center of mass is away from the handle, which may require more strength and coordination, as well as increased recruitment from stabilizers and prime movers simultaneously during particular movements. Many kettlebell exercises involve multiple joint motions and muscle groups.

	- Suspended bodyweight training is an innovative approach to bodyweight fitness training in that it uses a system of ropes and webbing that allows the user to work against their own bodyweight while performing various exercises.

	- Sandbags are designed to be carried, lifted, thrown, and pulled, and most come with several handles to easily change grips. Unlike barbells, dumbbells, and selectorized machines, the sand within the bag is constantly shifting, providing continuous instability.

	- ViPR is an acronym for vitality, performance, and reconditioning. It is designed to be dragged, tossed, lifted, pulled, pressed, and carried. This design provides the fitness professional the ability to perform multidirectional, full-body exercises with external load resistance, known as loaded movement training.

	- Battle ropes are typically made of heavy-duty nylon and come in a variety of lengths and thicknesses. Battle ropes are low-impact activities, which provide less impact on the joints.

	- Balance modalities improve balance, ankle stability, and coordination but should not be used to perform maximal or near maximal lifts for safety reasons.

	- Stability balls, also known as Swiss balls, are frequently used in a variety of training facilities with a wide range of populations. They are primarily used to increase the demand for stability in an exercise, but they can also be used to reinforce proper posture during squatting movements.