---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Kettlebell and Bodyweight Training
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
## Bodyweight Training

Bodyweight exercises use an individual’s own body weight along with gravity to provide resistance for the movement. These exercises that do not require an additional load, such as dumbbells, or strength-training machines. Common bodyweight strength exercises include push-ups, pull-ups, bodyweight squats, and sit-ups. Bodyweight exercises are often used for core, balance, and plyometric training as well (see Chapters 16–18).

By performing bodyweight training exercises, individuals can learn how to train in all planes of motion and may acquire greater **kinesthetic awareness**. This is partially true because most bodyweight training exercises are closed-chain exercises. Closed-chain exercises may result in greater muscle activation when compared with open-chain exercises (Augustsson et al., 1998; Brindle et al., 2002; Pozzi et al., 2019). Moreover, bodyweight training makes workouts portable, an added benefit for people who travel frequently or for those who do not enjoy the health club environment.

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Closed-chain exercises involve movements in which the distal extremities (hands or feet) are in a constant fixed position, and the force applied by an individual is not great enough to overcome the resistance (such as the ground or an immovable object). Examples of closed-chain exercises include push-ups, pull-ups, and squats.

Open-chain exercises involve movements in which the distal extremities are not in a fixed position, and the force applied by the body is great enough to overcome the resistance (such as barbells or dumbbells). Examples of open-chain exercises include the bench press, lat pulldown, and the machine leg extension exercise.

## Suspended Bodyweight Training

**Suspended bodyweight training** is an innovative approach to bodyweight fitness training that uses a system of ropes and webbing allowing the user to work against their own body weight while performing various exercises. Suspended bodyweight trainers are a unique concept in that they allow fitness professionals to modify exercises to meet the needs of virtually any client. Suspension movements are distinguished from traditional exercises in that either the user’s hands or feet are supported by a single anchor point, while the opposite end of the body is in contact with the ground, enabling the loading and unloading of movements to meet individual needs and goals (**Figure 22-1: 8**). They permit individuals to manipulate body position and stability to provide multiplanar, multijoint exercises in a proprioceptively enriched environment (Gaedtke & Morat, 2015).

Some of the physiologic benefits that come with suspended bodyweight training include:

	- Increased core muscle activation

	- Low compressive loads to the spine

	- Increased balance

	- Potential increase in caloric expenditure

	- Increased flexibility and joint mobility (Cugliari & Boccia, 2017; Dudgeon et al., 2010; Mok et al., 2015; Scheett et al., 2010)

When the Certified Personal Trainer is properly educated on how to safely set up and instruct clients, suspended bodyweight exercises become a powerful way to teach proper movement patterns, enhance stability and core strength, and gain metabolic benefits.

## Key Terms

**Kinesthetic awareness**
The awareness of the body’s position as it moves through multiple planes of motion.

**Suspended bodyweight training**
A form of resistance training that uses a system of ropes and webbing that allows the user to work against their own body weight while performing various exercises.

## Images

**Figure 22-18: TRX suspension trainer**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH22_fig22.18_TRX.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533