---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Sandbags, ViPR, and Battle Ropes
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
### HELPFUL HINT

Sandbags can be messy. Sand will need to be purchased from a DIY store. Fill the filler bags outside and remove any sand residue before placing into shell.

## ViPR

ViPR is an acronym for vitality, performance and reconditioning. The ViPR product is a cylindrical tube constructed of hardened rubber with ergonomically placed handles and openings on both ends (**Figure 22-2: 2**). It is designed to be dragged, tossed, lifted, pulled, pressed, and carried. This design provides the fitness professional the ability to perform multidirectional, full-body exercises with external load resistance. 

It ranges from 2 kg to 26 kg with 9 different weights (2 kg, 4 kg, 6 kg, 8 kg, 10 kg, 12 kg, 20 kg, and 26 kg). This versatility provides ample variations in weight for everyone from beginner or deconditioned individuals all the way to professional athletes.

ViPR uses **loaded movement training**, which is uniquely different as compared to traditional resistance exercises (ViPR, n.d.). Many dumbbell and barbell movements are performed in the sagittal plane. The ViPR, however, is not restricted to movements in a singular plane and allows for resistance to be experienced in all three planes of motion. The ViPR promotes the development of core stability through rotational movements. The goal is to better utilize the musculature of the core and hips to transfer power from the ground to the upper body (Gamble, 2007). ViPR exercises are particularly good for baseball, lacrosse, hockey, golf, tennis, and any other sport that requires explosive rotational strength. Another advantage to the ViPR is that movements can be made in a slow, controlled motion or can be performed explosively depending on the goals and desires of the client. Due to its versatility, the ViPR can be used in all phases of the OPT model.

## Key Terms

**Loaded movement training**
Adding additional weight or load to dynamic, full-body, multiplanar movements.

## Images

**Figure 22-22: ViPR**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF22.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533