---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Introduction to Proprioceptive Modalities
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Because of the BOSU ball’s unique shape and functionality, it offers a wide variety of exercises that can be performed by a wide range of clients. Like using a stability ball, proper progression from a stable, supported environment to the more unstable BOSU ball should be observed to ensure safety. Because of its stabilization demands, BOSU balls are ideal modalities to use in Phases 1 and 2 of the OPT model yet can be used in all phases, particularly when performing core and balance exercises.

## Terra-Core

The Terra-Core is comprised of an inflatable rubber bladder and hard-surfaced backing. However, the rectangular shape of the Terra-Core provides a larger overall footprint that measures 45 in. (114 cm) long by 17 in. (43 cm) wide by 10 in. (25 cm) high. Similar to a stability or BOSU ball, when an individual places their body weight on the device, the displaced air inside the bladder provides **perturbations**, which forces the user to actively engage their core musculature and supporting joints to achieve balance and stability.

Because the Terra-Core is portable, weighing only 31 lb (14 kg), like many of the other tools in this category, it is ideal for bootcamps, small groups, and 1-on-1 personal training and can even be used in rehabilitation and physical therapy settings. In addition, unlike stability balls, it is safe to perform several resistance training exercises, such as a dumbbell chest press while lying supine on the Terra-Core. In addition, the Terra-Core includes handles, side bars, and resistance bands when using the underside of the modality for added variety (**Figure 22-3: 1**).

### CRITICAL

It is the fitness professional’s responsibility to ensure any movement on an unstable surface is performed with full competency with body weight before considering adding additional resistance.

## Key Terms

**Perturbation**
An alteration of the body’s current state caused by the application of an external force.

## Images

**Figure 22-31: Terra-core**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF31A.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 22-31: ).**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF31B.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533