---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Sandbags, ViPR, and Battle Ropes
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
## Sandbags

Sandbags provide the fitness professional a unique and versatile way to train their clients. Sandbags are designed to be carried, lifted, thrown, and pulled and most come with several handles to easily change grips (**Figure 22-2: 1**). Once viewed as a conditioning tool used for athletes, military personnel, first responders, or those who compete in strongman events, sandbag training has proven to be a highly effective and functional training tool that can be used by most fitness enthusiasts. Because sandbags are portable, they make an ideal tool for indoor and outdoor bootcamp classes as well as within a circuit or high-intensity interval training (HIIT) program. Unlike barbells, dumbbells, and selectorized machines, the sand within the bag is constantly shifting, providing continuous instability. It is this instability, combined with movement in multiple planes of motion, that actively engages muscles of the core and stabilizing joints more dynamically than isolated exercises (McGill et al., 2009).

Sandbags provide a pliable weighted resistance that can be applied to most movements and exercises including asymmetrically loaded and rotational movements. Placing clients in real-world training environments where they are bending, kneeling, squatting, twisting, and exploding with additional load increases overall metabolic activity (Delvecchio, 2018; McGill et al., 2009). Sandbags range in weight from 15 lb (6.8 kg) to excess of 160 lb (72.5 kg) and make an excellent choice for all phases of the OPT model.

## Images

**Figure 22-21: Sandbag exercises**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH22_fig22.21_sandbag.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533