---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction: Strength-training Machines, Free Weights, and Cable Machines
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
**TABLE 22-1: Pros and Cons of Strength Machines**

| Pros | Cons |
|---|---|
| May be less intimidating for certain clients | Many machines do not allow the user to perform total-body exercises |
| Can emphasize certain muscle groups for rehabilitation or bodybuilding purposes | Moves primarily in one plane of motion |
| Various intensities (load) provided in one weight stack | Does little to provide challenge to the core stabilization system |
| Does not require a spotter | May not be ideal for improving athletic performance |
| Provides extra support for clients with special needs | Machines do not fit all body types (short, tall, or obese clients may have a hard time adjusting the machine) |
| Keeps the client in a fixed plane of motion, which may limit excessive ranges of motion | Expensive in comparison to other strength-training modalities |

The use of dumbbells requires the individual to stabilize through their core muscles, as well as create greater demand on shoulder stability to handle the load. It is vital that the exercise modality used be specific to the client’s goals, needs, and abilities. The pros and cons of selectorized strength-training machines are illustrated in **Table 22: -1**. Because strength-training machines can be used for many goals and by varied populations, they can be effectively used in all exercise programs and phases of the OPT model.

## Free Weights (Barbells and Dumbbells)

Free weights, such as dumbbells and barbells, can be used by a variety of populations to meet fitness, wellness, and sports performance goals. Free weights allow individuals to perform exercises in all planes of motion (i.e., sagittal, frontal, transverse) with various degrees of ranges of motion consistent with those experienced in daily life and sport. Combining all of these motions enhances **motor learning** and improves muscular coordination and performance (Saeterbakken & Fimland, 2012). Moreover, many free-weight exercises can be easily progressed to provide greater demands on core stability and **proprioception** by progressing from **bilateral** to **unilateral** movements. For example, the dumbbell chest press exercise can be progressed from two arms, to alternating arms, to one arm, providing great variety in one exercise (**Figure 22: -2**). Free-weight exercises also allow clients to perform multijoint (complex) movements incorporating the entire body. Performing complex exercises requires more energy, enabling individuals to expend more calories in a shorter period (Viana et al., 2019). This is ideal for individuals seeking alterations in body composition, such as fat loss.

Although free weights can offer many benefits, such as improving postural stability, strength, and muscle size and power, they can be potentially dangerous for novice exercisers until proper exercise technique, namely, control and stability, is mastered. If certain exercises are too difficult to perform using free weights, one may need to regress to a strength-training machine until baseline levels of strength and coordination are met. After this period, free-weight exercises can be reintroduced into the exercise program to further enhance stability, strength, and power. In addition, many free-weight exercises, especially overhead lifts, often require a spotter to ensure proper exercise technique and safety.

## Key Terms

**Motor learning**
Integration of motor control processes through practice and experience, leading to a relatively permanent change in the capacity to produce skilled motor behavior.

**Proprioception**
The body’s ability to naturally sense its general orientation and relative position of its parts.

**Bilateral**
Relating to two sides of the body.

**Unilateral**
Relating to one side of the body.