---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Osteoporosis and Arthritis
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Flexibility should be limited to static and active stretching and aim to improve posture and limit thoracic kyphosis (hunchback posture). The use of self-myofascial techniques may be contraindicated for this population. Cardiorespiratory training should begin at a moderate intensity level (40% to 65% HR~max~), with a walking program, and should be based on physician’s advice and the client’s ability to tolerate exercise. Weight-bearing activities (e.g., walking or jogging) can be more beneficial to increasing BMD than nonweight-bearing activities (e.g., cycling, swimming). However, the client must be capable of performing these activities safely; otherwise, the client should opt for aquatic or cycling activities due to safety concerns.

Example core exercises in the standing position would include performing planks on an incline or cobras in a standing position. Other examples include performing a standing cable rotation or medicine ball rotations. Care should be taken with crunches or movements with a lot of spinal flexion. Monitor range of motion and check with a licensed physician. Plyometric training is not typically recommended for this population.

Resistance training should be performed in a seated or standing position as well. Research has indicated that higher intensities (75–85%) are needed to stimulate bone formation. Furthermore, it appears that the load (rather than the number of repetitions) is the determining factor in bone formation (Hong & Kim, 2018). However, to ensure proper kinetic chain preparation for these higher intensities, the fitness professional should progress clients slowly. Stabilization-focused resistance training is also important to counter a lack of balance that can lead to falls and hip fractures. It generally takes about 6 months of consistent exercise at relatively high intensities before any effect on bone mass is realized. If clients within this population are not progressed appropriately, they may get injured and have a setback in their progress. Exercise training programs for clients in this population may be performed in a circuit-style or PHA training system (see Chapter 20), focusing on hips, thighs, back, and arms. Progressing exercises to the standing position will help increase stress to the hips, thighs, and back as well as increase the demand for balance. Both components are necessary to overcome the effects of osteoporosis.

# Arthritis

**Arthritis **is an inflammatory condition that mainly affects the joints of the body. Arthritis is the leading cause of disability among U.S. adults and is also associated with significant activity limitation, work disability, reduced quality of life, and high healthcare costs (Hootman et al., 2016). Two of the most common types of arthritis are **osteoarthritis **and **rheumatoid arthritis**.

Osteoarthritis is caused by degeneration of cartilage within joints. This lack of cartilage creates a wearing on the surfaces of articulating bones and irregular new bone growth (osteophytosis), causing inflammation and pain at the joint. Some of the most commonly affected joints are in the hands, knees, hips, and spine.

## Key Terms

**Arthritis**
Chronic inflammation of the joints.

**Osteoarthritis**
Caused by degeneration of cartilage within joints.

**Rheumatoid arthritis**
A degenerative joint disease in which the body’s immune system mistakenly attacks its own tissue.