---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Obesity
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
It has been suggested that adults who remain sedentary throughout their life span will lose approximately 5 lb of muscle per decade, while simultaneously adding 15 lb of fat per decade (Mozaffarian et al., 2011). In addition, the average adult will experience a 15% reduction in fat-free mass between the ages of 30 and 80 years. When age-related fat gain was investigated, it was determined that body fat is not an age-related problem but instead relates to the number of hours individuals spend exercising per week (Maciejczyk et al., 2014). It has also been shown in sedentary individuals that daily activity levels account for more than 75% of the variability of body-fat storage in men (Drewnowski & Darmon, 2005).

## Obesity and Exercise Training

Africa Studio/Shutterstock.com

Regular physical activity and exercise is one of the most important factors related to long-term successful weight loss. It is important to note that obese and morbidly obese clients have unique problems associated with exercise. For example, research has also shown a correlation between body weight and the mechanics of their gait (walking pattern), in that obese individuals modify their gait pattern both during walking and at maximal speeds when compared to nonobese individuals (Ko et al., 2010). Exercise training for obese clients should focus primarily on energy expenditure, through a combination of core, balance, cardiorespiratory, and resistance training, to help them expend calories and improve their balance and gait mechanics. In doing so, more calories are potentially expended (Benito et al., 2016; Lagally et al., 2009).

For effective weight loss, obese clients should expend 200–300 kcal (calories) per exercise session, with a minimum weekly goal of 1,200 kcal of energy expenditure from combined physical activity and exercise. The initial exercise energy expenditure goal should be progressively increased to 2,000 kcal per week (Donnelly et al., 2009). Resistance training should gradually be added to any exercise program designed to promote weight loss, but sustained, long-term aerobic endurance activities are also a priority. Research suggests circuit-style resistance training, when compared with walking at a fast pace, produces nearly identical caloric expenditure rates in the same given time span (Catenacci et al., 2011). Resistance training is an important component of any weight-loss program because it helps maintain, or even increase, lean body mass, which eventually results in a higher metabolic rate and improved body composition. The same exercise training guidelines for apparently healthy adults can be used when designing aerobic and resistance training programs for obese clients. Health and movement assessments should always be performed to establish initial program design goals and parameters (Moore et al., 2016). Some of the fitness assessments presented in Chapter 12 can be used with this population, for example, using pushing, pulling, and modified squatting assessments. Resistance training exercises for assessment or training may be best performed with cables, exercise tubing, or body weight from a standing or seated position for obese clients. Flexibility exercises should also be performed from a standing or seated position. For example, using the standing hip flexor (rather than the kneeling hip flexor stretch), standing or seated hamstring stretch, wall calf stretches, and seated adductor stretch would be advised. Self-myofascial techniques should be used with caution and may need to be avoided or performed at home (discussed next in Psychosocial Aspects of Working with Obese Clients).

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH23_UNNUN04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533