---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Chronic Lung Disease and Intermittent Claudication
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Intermittent Claudication and Peripheral Arterial Disease

**Intermittent claudication **is the name for the manifestation of the symptoms caused by peripheral arterial disease—sometimes referred to as peripheral vascular disease. Intermittent claudication is characterized by limping, lameness, or pain in the lower leg during mild exercise that is a result of decreased blood supply to the lower extremities. **Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) **is characterized by the narrowing of major arteries that are responsible for supplying blood to the lower extremities (**Figure 23: -8**).

The primary limiting factor for exercise in the client with PAD is leg pain. One of the problems facing fitness professionals is the ability to differentiate between those who are limited by symptoms of true intermittent claudication versus similar leg complaints (such as tightness, cramping, and pain) that might simply be associated with deconditioning (**Table 23-2: 5**).

**TABLE 23-25: Physiologic and Training Considerations for Individuals with Intermittent Claudication or PAD**

| Physiologic Considerations | Considerations for Health and Fitness, Sport, and Athletic Training |
|---|---|
| Individuals with PAD frequently have coexisting coronary artery disease or diabetes. | For clients with coexisting coronary artery disease, do not exceed established heart rate upper limit (usually, this limit is established from a walking test, in which leg pain is the limiting factor).

Switching modalities so that leg pain will not limit exercise may result in a higher—and possibly inappropriate—cardiac workload.

If possible, a continuous format of exercise using walking is preferred.

Exercise duration should strive to be 20–30 total minutes, with continuous bouts of 10 minutes or greater, 3–5 days per week working up to 7 days. |

*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^      (continues)^*

## Key Terms

**Intermittent claudication**
The manifestation of the symptoms caused by peripheral arterial disease.

**Peripheral arterial disease (PAD)**
A group of diseases in which blood vessels become restricted or blocked, typically as a result of atherosclerosis; also referred to as peripheral vascular disease.

## Images

**Figure 23-8: Peripheral arterial disease**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH23_FIGF08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533