---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Cancer and Pregnancy
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Fitness professionals should follow the assessment guidelines in Chapters 11 and 12, using seated and standing assessments when applicable (**Table 23-2: 2**). Flexibility exercises should be performed in seated and standing positions, especially in the second and third trimesters. Static and active stretching should be used, and self-myofascial techniques may also be used as tolerated. However, self-myofascial techniques should not be performed on varicose veins that are sore or on areas where there is swelling (such as the calves). During the second and third trimesters, performing self-myofascial techniques in prone or supine positions is not advised. Cardiorespiratory training should consist primarily of moderate-intensity exercise (40–70% HR~max~) and progressed as tolerated or by a physician’s advice. Women who have not exercised before pregnancy can begin with 15 minutes of continuous aerobic activity and gradually progress to 30 minutes of low to moderate aerobic activity. Plyometric training is not advised for this population after the first trimester. Moderate- to high-intensity resistance exercise may be used in the first trimester if the individual is accustomed to exercise; however, in the second and third trimesters, lower-intensity exercise programs are advised.

**TABLE 23-22: Basic Exercise Guidelines for Women and Pregnancy**

| Mode | Low-impact or step aerobics that avoids jarring motions, treadmill walking, stationary cycling, and water activity |
|---|---|
| Frequency | 3–5 days per week |
| Intensity | Moderate intensity (40–70% HRmax), increase as tolerated or based on a physician’s advice |
| Duration | 15–30 minutes per day. There may be a need to start out with only 5 minutes of exercise and progressively increase to 30 minutes, depending on the severity of conditions. |
| Assessment | Pushing assessment

Pulling assessment

Overhead squat assessment (if tolerated) |
| Flexibility | Self-myofascial techniques, static and active stretching |
| Resistance Training | 2–3 days per week, using light loads at 12–15 repetitions

Moderate- to high-intensity resistance exercise may be used in the first trimester if the client is accustomed to exercise; however, in the second and third trimesters, lower-intensity exercise programs are advised. |
| Special Considerations | Avoid exercises in a prone (on stomach) or supine (on back) position after 12 weeks of pregnancy.

Avoid self-myofascial techniques on varicose veins and areas of swelling.

Plyometric training is not advised in the second and third trimesters. |