---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Diabetes
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Diabetes

**Diabetes **is a metabolic disorder in which the body does not produce enough insulin (type 1) or the body cannot respond normally to the insulin that is made (type 2). An estimated 23.6 million children and adults in the United States (9.4% of the population) have diabetes (Bullard et al., 2018). Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death worldwide and is associated with a greater risk for heart disease, hypertension, and adult-onset blindness (Bullard et al., 2018). Worldwide, the occurrence of diabetes has risen from 108 million in 1980 to 422 million in 2014 (World Health Organization, 2018a). It has been shown that people who develop diabetes before the age of 30 years are 20 times more likely to die by the age of 40 years than those who do not have diabetes (Thent et al., 2013).

There are two primary forms of diabetes: type 1 (insulin-dependent diabetes) and type 2 (noninsulin-dependent diabetes). Although type 2 is referred to as noninsulin-dependent diabetes, some individuals with type 2 diabetes cannot manage their blood glucose levels and do require additional insulin. Type 2 diabetes is strongly associated with an increase in childhood and adult-onset obesity.

## Key Terms

**Diabetes**
Chronic metabolic disorder, caused by insulin deficiency, which impairs carbohydrate usage and enhances usage of fat and protein.