---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Osteoporosis and Arthritis
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Resistance training, however, has been shown to improve BMD by no more than a few percent, and some researchers believe that this does not represent a high enough increase to prevent fractures from occurring. In fact, it has been estimated that a 20% increase in BMD is necessary to offset fractures. Thus, it has been suggested that training focused on the prevention of falls, rather than strength alone, is more advantageous for the elderly. Therefore, exercise regimens that combine resistance training to increase BMD with flexibility; core; and balance training to enhance body awareness, coordination, and balance might better facilitate the needs of this population (**Table 23-1: 6**).

**TABLE 23-16: Basic Exercise Guidelines for Individuals with Osteoporosis**

| Mode | Treadmill with handrail support |
|---|---|
| Frequency | 2–5 days per week |
| Intensity | Cardiorespiratory training should start at a moderate intensity level (40% to 65% HRmax) and progress as tolerated |
| Duration | 20–60 minutes per day or 8- to 10-minute bouts |
| Assessment | Pushing assessment

Pulling assessment

Overhead squat assessment (if tolerated) |
| Flexibility | Static and active stretching |
| Resistance Training | 1–3 sets of 8–20 repetitions, 2–3 days per week |
| Special Considerations | Progression should be slow, well monitored, and based on postural control. See additional references for specifics on reducing kyphosis (Katzman et al., 2017).

Exercises should be progressed, if possible, toward free sitting (no support) or standing.

Focus exercises on hips, thighs, back, and arms.

Avoid excessive spinal loading on squat and leg press exercises.

Make sure the client is breathing in normal manner and avoids holding their breath, as in a Valsalva maneuver. |

When implementing exercise programs, fitness professionals must follow some precautionary measures; for example, if the client demonstrates the ability to move fairly well without assistance, movement assessments may be followed. If the client is not able to get around very well, it is a good idea to use more stable, machine-based equipment during the assessment process and oftentimes during the exercise program. Fitness professionals should follow the kinetic chain checkpoints as closely as possible with this population but realize that there may be degenerative changes in their posture that cannot be corrected. Fitness professionals should try to get clients to their own ideal position, not a general ideal position, and remember to have clients from this population exercise while seated or in a standing position.