---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Chronic Lung Disease and Intermittent Claudication
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
In general, exercise for these clients is similar to what would be appropriate for the general population (**Table 23-2: 4**). Exercise can improve functional capacity and decrease the symptoms of dyspnea in this population, among many other physiologic and psychological benefits (Ries et al., 2007). The use of lower-body cardiorespiratory and resistance training exercises seems to be best tolerated. Upper-extremity exercises place an increased stress on the secondary respiratory muscles that are involved in stabilizing the upper extremities during exercise (American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, 2019). Therefore, caution should be used when designing programs for this population to ensure adequate rest intervals. The use of the PHA training system would be advised.

**TABLE 23-24: Basic Exercise Guidelines for Individuals with Lung Disease**

| Mode | Treadmill walking, stationary cycling, steppers, and elliptical trainers |
|---|---|
| Frequency | 3–5 days per week |
| Intensity | 40–60% of peak work capacity |
| Duration | Work up to 20–45 minutes |
| Assessment | Pushing assessment (if tolerated)

Pulling assessment (if tolerated)

Overhead squat assessment (if tolerated) |
| Flexibility | Static and active stretching

Self-myofascial techniques (if tolerated) |
| Resistance Training | 1 set of 8–15 repetitions, 2–3 days per week

PHA training system is recommended. |
| Special Considerations | Upper-body exercises cause increased dyspnea and must be monitored.

Allow for sufficient rest between exercises. |

In some clients, inspiratory muscle training can specifically improve the work associated with breathing. Fitness professionals working with clients who have lung disease should inquire about this intervention to see whether it might augment the general exercise program. For more information, read the comprehensive guidelines regarding the exercise assessment and training of individuals with lung disease published by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation (2019).