---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Hypertension and Coronary Heart Disease
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Fitness professionals must be careful not to overstate the benefits of exercise as a singular intervention and must emphasize to clients the importance of a multidisciplinary approach to heart disease. Exercise, however, is critically important and can be safely conducted in most health and fitness settings (**Table 23-1: 4**). Fitness professionals should follow the guidelines in Chapters 11 and 12 for assessment of clients with CHD. If possible, exercises should be performed in a seated or standing position. Clients should stay with static and active stretching in a standing or seated position because they may be the easiest and safest to perform. Consult with a licensed physician for specific recommendations concerning self-myofascial techniques. Cardiorespiratory training should focus on moderate-intensity exercise (40–75% HR~max~) and only progress with the physician’s advice.

**TABLE 23-14: Basic Exercise Guidelines for Individuals with Coronary Heart Disease**

| Mode | Large muscle group activities, such as stationary cycling, treadmill walking, or rowing |
|---|---|
| Frequency | 3–5 days per week |
| Intensity | Moderate-intensity exercise, 40% to 75% HRmax, and only progress with the physician’s advice

The talk test may also be more appropriate as medications may affect heart rate. |
| Duration | 5–10 minutes warm-up, followed by 20–40 minutes of exercise, followed by a 5- to 10-minute cool-down |
| Assessment | Pushing assessment

Pulling assessment

Overhead squat assessment (if tolerated) |
| Flexibility | Static and active stretching in a standing or seated position |
| Resistance Training | 1–3 sets of 10–20 repetitions, 2–3 days per week

Tempo should not exceed 1 second for isometric and concentric portions.

Use circuit or PHA weight training as an option, with appropriate rest intervals. |
| Special Considerations | Be aware that clients may have other diseases to consider as well, such as diabetes, hypertension, peripheral vascular disease, or obesity.

Modify tempo or pace to avoid extended isometric and concentric muscle actions.

Avoid heavy lifting and Valsalva maneuvers—make sure client breathes normally.

Do not let client overgrip weights or clench fists when training.

Perform exercises in a standing or seated position.

Progress exercise slowly. |

Core exercises in a standing position are preferred. Some examples include performing planks on an incline, standing cable iso-rotations, or cobras in a standing position. Plyometric and isometric training would not be recommended for this population in the initial months of training.

Resistance training should ideally be performed in a seated or standing position as well. Low-intensity resistance training is appropriate for this population. Ideally, programs should be performed in a circuit-style or peripheral heart action (PHA) training system (see Chapter 20), with sufficient rest as needed by the client. The fitness professional should always ensure that the client is breathing normally and is not straining to exercise or overgripping (squeezing too tightly) the exercise equipment, as this can increase blood pressure.