---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Physical Inactivity and Its Relationship to Chronic Disease
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### RESPIRATORY DISEASE

**Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)** is an umbrella term for chronic respiratory dysfunctions that are characterized by increased breathlessness, airflow limitation, and accelerated decline of lung function. These symptoms are not fully reversible and significantly limit activities of daily living for those who are diagnosed. Emphysema and chronic bronchitis are examples of COPD. By 2030, COPD is estimated to become the third leading cause of death worldwide (Quaderi & Hurst, 2018).

Individuals with COPD often have several accompanying chronic health conditions. Consequently, they often have lower health-related quality of life, which in itself is an independent predictor of hospitalizations and mortality (Janssen et al., 2011). Once diagnosed, COPD is not considered curable; rather, it is medically managed over a person’s life span. However, lifestyle modification and increased physical activity can have positive effects for individuals with a chronic respiratory condition. Specifically, light aerobic exercise involving large muscle groups is recommended to help improve the ability to use oxygen; brisk walking daily can be one of the best forms of exercise for people with COPD (Bender et al., 2016).

### STRESS

The world we live in is becoming more and more complex, fueled by rapid change and the need to constantly respond and adapt to it. In the face of 24-hour news cycles, social media, and increased demands for productivity, stress is on the rise. According to the Global Organization for Stress, most of the world is affected by stress and stress-related complications (deVries & Wilkerson, 2003). Stress levels in the workplace are rising, with 6 in 10 workers in all major global economies reporting that their workplace-related stress is increasing (Birhanu et al., 2018). And that workplace stress is taking its toll, with stress-related illnesses rising in turn among all segments of the population (Fink, 2016). Constant unmanaged stress and anxiety is harmful to both the body and mind and may elevate the risk for chronic disease (Yaribeygi et al., 2017).

However, regular physical activity and exercise have been shown to help control and manage stress and anxiety (Rebar et al., 2015). Any form of physical activity or exercise can act as a powerful stress release and is perhaps the “best medicine” to help relieve stress. One way regular exercise helps reduce stress is by the brain releasing **endorphins **that are associated with pain reduction and feelings of increased well-being and happiness. Additionally, the ability of exercise to help lower and control heart rate and blood pressure makes it an important countermeasure to stress and anxiety. For those reasons, the role of physical activity and exercise in helping to relieve and control stress is extensive and convincing (Stults-Kolehmainen & Sinha, 2014).

## Key Terms

**Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)**
A general term used to describe progressive lung diseases, including emphysema, chronic bronchitis, and refractory (nonreversible) asthma.

**Endorphins**
A group of hormones secreted by the brain that provides a variety of physiological functions, such as reducing the perception of pain.