---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Global State of Health
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
A general definition of *disease *includes any abnormal condition that negatively affects the structure or function of a part of the body. Diseases can affect one area of the body or they can be systemic, affecting every part of the body (i.e., various forms of cancer). There are two basic types of disease: chronic, or noncommunicable (i.e., not contagious), disease and acute disease. Acute disease accounts for conditions like getting sick from the flu virus, while the WHO (2018a) defines chronic disease as follows:

# TRAINING TIP

Health is a dynamic and ever-changing process. As you work with clients, ask them where they think they are on the spectrum presented in Figure 1-3 and then compare it against your objective observations. Use this information to help guide your approach to designing individualized training programs, or to determine if your client should be referred to a medical professional.

> 
> 
> 
> Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), also known as chronic diseases, tend to be of long duration and are the result of a combination of genetic, physiological, environmental and behaviors factors. The main types of NCDs are cardiovascular diseases (like heart attacks and stroke), cancers, chronic respiratory diseases (such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma) and diabetes.
> 
> 
> 

# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

**Acute Versus Chronic Disease**

An acute medical event or disease is any medical condition that occurs suddenly and can be treated and healed in a short period of time. For example, an isolated bout of bronchitis is an acute medical condition that is easily treated with antibiotics and rest, and typically resolves in a week or so. However, if left untreated, the condition could progress to more serious chronic problems.

A chronic disease is a medical condition that persists for a long duration or cannot be cured altogether, typically lasting for 3 months or more. Chronic diseases generally cannot be prevented by vaccines or cured by medications, nor do they just disappear over time. For example, individuals with a long history of smoking are prone to acute bouts of bronchitis, which can and often do progress toward chronic bronchitis.

It is important for fitness professionals to keep in mind that a wide range of chronic diseases can be avoided by two simple things: eating a healthy diet and taking part in regular exercise to stay physically fit. Someone who is primarily sedentary, is deconditioned, and eats a diet mainly consisting of junk food will be far more likely to develop a chronic disease than someone who follows a healthy diet and stays regularly active (CDC, 2020a, 2020b).