---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
Additionally, when not working with clients, employed fitness professionals have the advantage of being able to work the floor to meet new members and build rapport. Fitness professionals just starting their career should realize that it could take as long as 3 to 6 months of work to develop a full client schedule.

Not only is continuing education a requirement for maintaining the NASM personal training credential, but it also can help fitness professionals expand their business by learning how to work with niche populations. Numerous options exist to earn the required 2.0 CEUs every 2 years.

### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 2 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 2 Audio Review

**00:0011:03**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- From working in a large health club, to training clients in their own homes, fitness professionals have numerous options to establish a personal training practice with a consistent flow of clients.

	- Another employment choice for fitness professionals is starting a fitness business, which could include working with clients in their homes, running outdoor group workout programs, or opening a studio.

	- As technology is evolving, there are many options for offering training services online.

	- Working as an independent contractor allows a fitness professional to establish their own pay rates and to earn the entire amount, but operational expenses, insurance costs, and taxes must also be accounted for.

	- The first step in succeeding as a Certified Personal Trainer is offering uncompromising customer service.

	- Selling personal training services is about asking a client to make a commitment to an exercise program to improve their own health, wellness, and fitness, which makes selling an activity of uncovering client needs and presenting solutions to those problems.

	- If rapport is properly built with a prospective client, sales will feel natural and automatic.

	- Forecasting techniques should be used to predict how many clients will need to be serviced to support a desired annual financial goal.

	- Marketing is the process of communicating how a specific product or service will meet the wants and needs of a potential client.

	- The Four Ps of marketing include product, price, promotion, and place.

	- Social media and other digital marketing campaigns are extremely important for growing a modern fitness business.

	- Continuing education courses are not just necessary for recertification; they can teach fitness professionals how to work with niche populations and enable the expansion of a fitness business to new and exciting areas.

	- The most popular methods of earning CEUs are attending workshops or conferences or completing online education programs. Additionally, CEUs can be earned by participating in livestream webinars, reading fitness articles and passing a quiz or test, or contributing to the industry by creating content for fitness education programs, speaking at conferences, and presenting webinars.