---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Continuing Education
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
# Continuing Education

Stoatphoto/Shutterstock.com

As a career in fitness progresses, it will be important to pursue additional education necessary to develop the skills and abilities to serve a wider range of client types. The most successful fitness professionals know the value of being lifetime learners, and they live with the mentality that the more they know, the more there is to learn. The fitness industry is constantly evolving, with new research happening every day that potentially changes the way we think about the human body. Because of this, Certified Personal Trainers— similar to other allied health professionals—must remember that earning the CPT credential is only the start of a lifetime of professional development. The critical importance for working fitness professionals to stay current with the industry’s ever-growing body of knowledge means that NASM requires all Certified Personal Trainers to complete a specific amount of continuing education every 2 years to keep their certifications active and valid.

## Requirements

NASM awards continuing education units (CEUs) at the rate of 0.1 per contact hour of training. For example, if a continuing education activity is approved by the recertification department for 0.5 CEUs, that activity is expected to take around 5 hours to complete. To keep the NASM personal training credential active and valid, NASM requires its fitness professionals to complete 1.9 CEUs—roughly 19 hours of continued education—every 2 years. Additionally, because it is a strict requirement for certification, a final 0.1 unit is awarded for the renewal of a fitness professional’s CPR/AED certification. All in all, this makes for a total requirement of 2.0 CEUs every 2 years.

### HELPFUL HINT

A total of 2.0 CEUs is required to renew the NASM personal training credential every 2 years: 1.9 CEUs from continuing education efforts and 0.1 CEU from renewing a CPR/AED certification.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH02_UNNUN14.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533