---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Fitness Industry Employment Landscape
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
Current-day Certified Personal Trainers are now responsible for designing exercise programs that integrate all systems of the body using a variety of exercises that improve balance and coordination, core strength, overall movement quality, and health. The function of a Certified Personal Trainer has evolved from simply improving aesthetic appearance to helping clients improve their overall quality of life by designing exercise programs for weight loss, injury prevention, athletic performance, and function improvement for activities of daily living. This creates employment opportunities for fitness professionals who have the knowledge, skills, and abilities to create customized exercise programs.

A Certified Personal Trainer credential can help an individual begin a career in the fitness industry; however, as fitness professionals progress through their careers, it will be necessary to pursue continuing education to develop advanced skills that meet the needs of a wider variety of clients, such as those with chronic health conditions (e.g., heart disease, type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis) or musculoskeletal dysfunction (e.g., limited flexibility and poor movement quality).

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

A National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM) Certified Personal Trainer beginning their career should be prepared to design exercise programs for people of all ages and generations, specifically:

	- Generation Z (post-Millennials): born after the year 1997

	- Millennials: born between the years 1981 and 1996

	- Generation X: born between the years 1965 and 1980

	- Baby Boomers: born between the years 1946 and 1964

	- Silent Generation: born between the years 1925 and 1945

As adults progress through the human life span, their abilities change, and it will be necessary to adjust exercise programs accordingly (Mora & Valencia, 2018). This creates the need for fitness professionals to pursue continuing education to ensure they develop the skills to meet the needs of a changing clientele.

## Employment Opportunities

After earning the credential, the next step is deciding the best employment option that provides for a stable income with a schedule to accommodate a comfortable work–life balance. From working in a large health club to training clients in their own homes, Certified Personal Trainers have several different options to establish a practice with consistent clients.

One choice a fitness professional must make is whether to work as a direct employee of an organization or as an independent contractor. A second choice is to start a business that could include working with clients in their homes, running group workout programs in a local park (with the appropriate permits), or investing the money to open a studio. Finally, as technology is evolving, there are now numerous options for offering fitness training services online.

No matter which avenue of fitness employment is selected, it can take time to acquire clients and build a solid book of business that provides a steady source of income.