---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Career Development
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
## Career Development

Personal training can be a rewarding career in terms of both helping others to change their lives and earning a good living. Many fitness professionals pursue careers in the fitness industry because they are passionate about helping others, not because they enjoy the minutiae of administrating staff policies or managing expense reports. However, at some point in almost every fitness professional’s career, there will be the consideration about whether or not to apply for a promotion to club management because it can provide a consistent salary and be a great step for long-term career growth.

Every place of employment is different; so, before making the decision to take on an expanded role at a company, fitness professionals need to carefully consider whether it will provide long-term career satisfaction. Moving into management can quickly shift the focus of a fitness career from directly helping people to overseeing business tasks. For some, that is an expected consequence of career development; but for others, it can mean a departure from the very reason they chose to earn a CPT credential.

### FITNESS MANAGER

A fitness manager’s duties include maintaining a staffing schedule, providing mentorship to fitness professionals, and holding regular meetings with the entire fitness team, all while still responding directly to member needs when necessary. For fitness professionals with the long-term goal of opening a facility, working as a fitness manager will inherently teach many of the necessary business and managerial skills required for running a successful operation. Fitness managers are paid in salary with bonuses for reaching performance goals.