---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Career Development
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
| Component | Description |
|---|---|
| Work experience | The Retail Outlet 2005 - Current

2015–Current General Manager
Manage all operations for a large retail establishment resulting in $80,000 a month in sales.
Three-time winner of General Manager of the Quarter. Promoted from Assistant Manager.

2012–2015 Assistant Manager
Organized staff schedule and supervised employees. Promoted from Shift Leader.

2009–2012 Shift Leader
Responsible for supervising cash register employees during work shift. Promoted from Cashier.

2005–2009 Cashier
Perform general duties related to customer service and collecting payment for customer orders.

Even if it is not specifically relevant to working as a fitness professional, it is important to show a consistent employment history. Moreover, this is where an applicant can feature skills that carry over to the fitness industry. Such skills might be managing a budget or customer service, and demonstrating leadership skills, such as being promoted or given responsibility as a supervisor. Special awards or recognition like Employee of the Month or highest-producing salesperson should be called out. Potential employers want applicants that know how to go above and beyond the basic expectations of a job. |
| Education | NASM Certified Personal Trainer - earned in 2019

California State University 2012
Bachelor of Science in Business Administration

Anytown High School 2006
General studies

Applicants should list their personal training credential along with any other formal education like trade school, community college, four-year university, or postgraduate work. Again, it is not necessary that the education be specifically relevant to the fitness industry; the purpose is to show the ability to learn and follow through with completing an education program. |
| Other interests | Volunteer - Anytown Red Cross
Volunteer on a monthly basis to help the Red Cross serve meals to those in need.

Anytown High School
Varsity Basketball, 2-year starter, state champions 2005

Applicants should identify nonwork experience like being an athlete, which can be relevant for showing that an applicant can successfully work as a member of a team, or volunteer work, which demonstrates the ability to manage time and shows that an applicant takes an interest in being of service to others. |

^**Figure 2-1** Continued^