---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Career Development
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### GENERAL MANAGER

Often promoted from a department manager position, a general manager is responsible for all business operations of the club, from sales to repairs and maintenance. They oversee multiple departments and individual employees. General managers are often paid a salary with bonuses for achieving specific performance metrics. Depending on the company structure, opportunities for advancement into regional, divisional, and national corporate management roles may also exist. Moving into higher roles of management will typically require advanced education in both the fitness and business fields.

### FACILITY OWNER

One of the benefits of becoming a Certified Personal Trainer is the relatively low cost for starting a business when compared to many other industries. In its simplest form, the initial start-up costs for an entry-level personal training business are for the certification exam, liability insurance, appropriate business licenses (as applicable by locale), marketing costs, and a few pieces of easily transportable exercise equipment.

Fitness professionals can start a business working with clients in their homes or public spaces, and then eventually grow to a point where it is financially viable to invest in and open a physical location. There are different models for this, including opening a franchise, starting a business from scratch, or purchasing an existing fitness facility. Some owners may be very involved in the business and work as the general manager of the facility, while other owners may invest in a business and pay a manager to conduct the operations. With so many options to consider, a fitness professional’s entrepreneurial spirit is what will truly determine if individual business ownership is the right path to choose.

### ADJACENT CAREERS

In addition to working directly with clients, a personal training credential can serve as the foundation for an alternative career path. The following are a list of potential opportunities for fitness professionals interested in growing their careers in a different direction than traditional club management and operations. It is important to note, however, that many of these options will require additional education, such as completing a bachelor’s or even a master’s degree.

	- **Master Instructor**

		- Works directly with equipment companies or fitness education organizations to teach workshops that provide attendees with continuing education. This often requires formal education like a degree in an exercise-related field, as well as the participation in a formal selection process to become a trusted representative of a company.

	- **Writer or Blogger**

		- Writes fitness-related content that is relevant to specific demographics for online resources or print magazines. Independent bloggers can earn money via ad revenue on their website, while a more common option is to be paid per article to write content for health clubs, equipment companies, or other fitness-related businesses. This requires effective written communication skills and the ability to identify interesting content that is relevant to a specific audience. Additionally, credibility and a solid professional reputation need to be crafted before moving into the content creation world.