---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Social Influences on Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
### PARENTAL

The influence of parents on exercise behavior is particularly important for children and adolescents. If parents have a positive relationship with exercise, then their children will be more likely to have a positive outlook on regular exercise, which can carry on into adulthood. Parents typically provide emotional and instrumental support, with the main type of instrumental support coming from providing transportation and paying for activities. For adolescents, this type of support, even more than emotional support from family and peers, can explain long-term exercise adherence (Siceloff et al., 2014).

Research has also shown that parental support for physical activity is important for adolescents, including the transition to adulthood, indicating that parental influence goes beyond children and adolescents (Gill et al., 2018; Li et al., 2016). Parental influence over physical activity is apparent at a very young age; evidence shows that there is a positive relationship between the physical activity of mothers and their preschool children, meaning if mothers were active, then so were their children (Hesketh et al., 2014). Parents can also provide informational support to children by talking about the importance of regular exercise and all the benefits it brings. It is also beneficial for children to try a variety of physical activities (e.g., sports and recreational activities) so that they can naturally find which activities they do well or simply enjoy the most. Having an early and consistent exposure to exercise and physical activities will help create habits that are long-lasting.

### EXERCISE LEADERS

Group exercise comes in many forms, including formatted classes taught to music and small group personal training, such as boot camps or sport-specific training. It can be found in large fitness facilities and small boutique studios, and some businesses are structured around only offering group exercise experiences. While not everyone will consider a group setting appealing, it does remain a popular way for many people to regularly engage in exercise. The exercise leader plays a crucial role with the overall tone and flow of the experience. Generally speaking, this is the person who should greet all members, make everyone feel welcome, ensure that participants have the right equipment and attire to safely engage, and use a variety of techniques to motivate and energize a group.

The exercise leader can also go a step further and learn participant’s names, introduce new members to the existing group, and try to connect with members before and after class to provide encouragement and get feedback. The idea of providing leadership in an exercise setting may not be a common expectation when professionals enter the fitness industry, but leadership plays a key role in determining whether a participant adheres to exercise or drops out. It is often noted that there is not a single best approach to leadership, but there are recognized components for effective leadership: the leader’s qualities, leadership styles, situational factors, and follower’s qualities (Weinberg & Gould, 2019b). **Table 3-3** displays examples of these leadership components.

**TABLE 3-3 Components of Leadership**

| Leadership Component | Examples |
|---|---|
| Leader’s qualities | The leader should offer a great example in how to lead a healthy and balanced life, which includes being optimistic, empathetic, and knowledgeable. |
| Leadership styles | The different styles of leadership include a participant-centered approach that encourages feedback and input or an autocratic approach where participants are told what to do in a task-oriented environment. Leaders should be able to adjust their style based on the situation. |
| Situational factors | These factors include group size, whether it is a large or small group, and potential  adjustments for style; for example, larger groups may need a more autocratic style. |
| Follower’s qualities | Leaders should consider the qualities of the followers, including age, gender, and  exercise experience. |