---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Common Barriers to Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
Individuals with social physique anxiety may make comments similar to the following statements:

	- I’ll start working out when I lose a little weight.

	- I would work out, but I don’t have anything comfortable to wear.

	- I feel self-conscious working out in front of people.

	- I feel like everyone is staring at me.

Any comments that suggest a person’s discomfort with the way they may be viewed may indicate some level of social physique anxiety.

Social physique anxiety may prove a difficult barrier to overcome because it can also be related to body image issues. Some ways to overcome this barrier include matching clients to types of exercise that can be done outside of a fitness facility or using discreet areas of a facility to train clients. It should also be emphasized that clients should wear comfortable clothing and that activities that require specific attire, such as swimming or water aerobics, are optional.

It is known that, in general, women experience higher levels of social physique anxiety compared to men; however, men experience some level of it as well (Chu et al., 2008; Hagger & Stevenson, 2010; McLester et al., 2018). Social physique anxiety has also been found to be lower with individuals who have a lower body mass index (Ersöz et al., 2016; McLester et al., 2018). When social physique anxiety is a barrier to exercise, fitness professionals should make an effort to provide alternative ways to participate and use care when integrating individuals into more mainstream options (**Figure 3-2**).

## Convenience

Convenience in life is something that nearly everyone prefers, and convenience to exercise is no different. Most people will avoid an inconvenient activity, whether the inconvenience includes the time it will take, the distance to get there, the attire that is required, or the cost to participate. For example, if a fitness facility is located on the way to or from work, it may be viewed as convenient; however, other factors should be considered if people are exercising before work, such as locker rooms or proximity to home. Convenience will be subjective, meaning that two people may view the same factor in different ways. Driving 5 miles to a facility may not bother one person, whereas someone else may see it as highly inconvenient and, therefore, a barrier.

Many clients will travel for what they view as exceptional experiences such as a specialty group exercise class, clean facilities with current equipment, or the ability to work with a specific fitness professional. One way to help clients overcome this barrier is to provide excellent customer service, which includes individualized exercise programming. Another way to help clients maximize their physical activity is to help them identify ways for them to exercise at home, during a lunch hour, or in between other responsibilities. The bottom line is that there are always options available to make exercise possible for those who want to participate.

## Images

**Figure 3-2: Inverse relationship between social physique anxiety and physical activity**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH03_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533