---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Common Barriers to Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
## Ambivalence

**Ambivalence **happens when someone has mixed feelings about a situation. There is usually a positive and negative component to the way something is perceived. When it comes to exercise, people may believe that it is an overall good idea, but it will cut into time spent with family, at work, or at social gatherings. People who are ambivalent about exercise might easily find excuses as to why it just won’t fit into their lifestyle. Informing clients about all the benefits of exercise and the negative effects of sedentary living on the overall quality of life may be a good place to start. However, ambivalent people may be aware of the benefits but also struggle with the drastic way in which regular exercise may affect other aspects of their life. When people see both sides of an argument, they can often weigh the pros and cons along with assessing the benefits versus the effort it will take or what must be sacrificed to participate. For ambivalent clients, it will be necessary to probe further to find out the other significant barriers and also what might motivate them to take action.

### TRY THIS

Take some time to identify barriers that prevent participation in exercise and strategize ways to personally overcome these barriers. This will allow you to relate to the struggles that clients face while providing solutions. Clients will appreciate that they are not the only ones facing barriers and will benefit from the personal connection.

## Key Terms

**Ambivalence**
Describes a person’s state of mixed feelings about a situation.