---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Role of Psychology in Fitness and Wellness
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
This type of motivation has also been associated with people who strongly identify with exercise, where there is a satisfaction that comes from regular participation (Ntoumanis et al., 2018). Individuals who are intrinsically motivated to exercise will likely experience some enjoyment with regular participation, which may be due to a genetic predisposition toward intrinsic motivation (Caldwell Hooper et al., 2014). Also, for intrinsic motivation to occur, people need to have knowledge and some ability to make choices about how to proceed. It has been demonstrated that when people are engaged in the process of changing their behaviors, they are more successful in achieving outcomes.

For example, a physical activity intervention revealed that individuals who were specifically exposed to information on intrinsic motivation were more active and more intrinsically motivated after 12 months compared with a group who received standardized information (Silva et al., 2010). Additionally, when individuals were guided to identify the importance of exercise for them and their confidence in their abilities to exercise, they were enabled to choose tailored exercise plans to be physically active. Further, they remained more active over time compared to a group that was not provided the same level of interaction (Friederichs et al., 2015).

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

Intrinsic motivation is strongly rooted in the self-determination theory, which is a commonly used theory of behavioral change. It proposes that people will implement change when they feel (1) competent, which is mastering tasks or skills; (2) a sense of belonging to other people, which is referred to as relatedness; and (3) a sense of autonomy, which is feeling a sense of control over their actions and goals (Ryan & Deci, 2000).

There are situations when motives are both extrinsic and intrinsic. Some examples include times when individuals are extrinsically motivated to avoid failure but the desire to avoid failure is related to their overall self-esteem or when individuals want to lose weight because they know they will be healthier and feel more energized. Regardless of the reason(s) why someone is motivated to exercise, it is crucial to understand individual motives, and reassess motives over time, to provide a tailored program that continues to meet the needs of the client.

#### HELPFUL HINT

When trying to differentiate between the two types of motivation, just remember that intrinsic motivation is something that comes from within and is considered internal to a person. Extrinsic motivation is something that is external to the person.

### UNDERSTANDING HOW MOTIVATION DIFFERS

Motivation to exercise will be unique to everyone; however, understanding how motivation may differ for certain demographics may be useful when establishing and growing a client base. While there are always exceptions, younger adults tend to be motivated by competitive situations, a feeling of being part of a social group, or the improvement of physical appearance. As people age, motives shift toward more health-related variables such as lowering blood pressure or avoiding other chronic health conditions (Kulavic et al., 2013).