---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Social Influences on Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# Social Influences on Exercise

There are a number of possible social influences on overall exercise behavior, which vary among individuals. Determining which social influences are meaningful to a client will help explain the role that these influences might play in terms of exercise behavior. In general, influence means having an effect over the behavior of a person or group. Social influences are constantly present in exercise behavior, and these influences can lead individuals both toward and away from structured exercise. It is important to recognize that not all social influences are positive, and in such cases, they become a barrier to overcome. Social support has two main components: who or what is providing the support and what type of support is being provided. Support from family and friends may seem like the most likely source, but it can come from anyone, including coworkers, healthcare providers, fitness professionals, or fellow exercisers.

 Pixelheadphoto digitalskillet/Shutterstock.com

Social influences have also grown well beyond personal interactions, with people using social media for inspiration, information, and support. Social media can provide several outlets for people who may not have a supportive face-to-face network. For example, some people maintain blogs, websites, or a social media platform where they track their fitness journey; there are online support groups for any number of behavioral changes. Fitness professionals should ask clients which online sites they use to gain a better understanding of possible social influences. Fitness professionals should help evaluate the information, such as whether or not a source has reliable information and if healthy habits are being encouraged, so that clients are not receiving mixed messages. Additionally, information on social media platforms should be evaluated regarding its realistic or unrealistic nature. For example, images that depict extreme physiques, such as bodybuilders or fitness models, may negatively impact the way someone feels about their own body.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH03_UNNUN06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533