---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
##### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Behavior change techniques and their application may sound technical and confusing but don’t overthink it! You are probably already using some of these techniques without knowing that you are. For example, when you enhance clients’ confidence by convincing them that they can lift a certain weight, you are already using a behavior change technique to modify self-efficacy. When you write a program for clients and instruct them to plan where they will do it, you are using a behavior change technique to help them improve their self-regulation.

## Behavioral Strategies

There are several different techniques that a fitness professional may use to help clients adhere to exercise. Self-regulation provides the basis for goal-directed action. Self-regulatory BCTs have previously been identified as important for helping individuals adopt exercise regimens (Rhodes et al., 2017) and are associated with positive outcomes (Belanger-Gravel et al., 2013; Samdal et al., 2017).

Fitness professionals should also focus on making the exercise experience enjoyable while enhancing the client’s self-efficacy. Self-efficacy beliefs partially determine self-regulation efforts, how much effort they give, and how long they persist when challenges arise. The appraisal of perceived abilities relative to the challenge of the task will determine whether exercise behavior will be attainable and pursued (Bandura, 1991). Therefore, goal setting, self-efficacy, planning, and self-monitoring should be targeted.

### GOAL SETTING

Fitness professionals need to understand how to help clients set goals. Goals represent the what that sits at the crossroads of *how* and *why*, where *why* represents a client’s values and *how* represents the way the goal will be achieved. It is important for fitness professionals and clients to understand and verbalize why a goal is important. These *whys* are top-level goals.

Clients may have unrealistic goals, so it is important to help manage client expectations in an appropriate way. Many goals, as it relates to exercise, are achievable if time is considered. Unrealistic goals in short time periods lead to overly challenging exercise programs, which are difficult to adhere to for a variety of reasons. To help clients develop sound goals that they can accomplish, it is recommended for fitness professionals to incorporate SMART goal setting techniques.

#### SMART GOALS

Though SMART goals do not encompass all of the goal-setting principles, they can be very effective. The acronym SMART stands for specific, measurable, attainable, realistic, and timely (**Figure 4-5**).

Fitness professionals should encourage clients to match their behaviors to their goals. Goals can be broken down into subgoals that should be well-defined and trackable. For example, more global goals (i.e., complete 30 push-ups in a row) can be broken down into smaller behavioral goals that will add up to the accomplishment of the greater goal (i.e., do three sets of 10 push-ups each morning). Tracking whether three sets of 10 push-ups were completed is an easily measurable task. And to evaluate progress, fitness professionals should encourage clients to write down their goals and refer back to them frequently.

## Images

**Figure 4-5: SMART goals**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH04_FIGF05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533