---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Behavioral Coaching
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
### HELPFUL HINT

Behavior change techniques, by nature, are generic. Self-efficacy, for example, may be enhanced with several different behavior change techniques, which can be delivered through several different channels. Fitness professionals cannot always deliver behavior change techniques in person. The use of technology, such as text message reminders, email lists, and social media interactions, can help considerably with adherence to a routine while a client is outside of the gym.

# Determinants of Participation in Exercise

Successfully changing fitness behaviors begins with a clear understanding of the contributing factors that influence whether people participate. Coaching works by changing one or more of these factors, which are called **determinants of behavior**. Essentially, determinants of behavior represent the generic modifiable variables that cause a behavior (Kok et al., 2016). Participating in exercise has several determinants, including motivation, self-efficacy, self-regulation, exercise history, body weight, stress, social support, access, time constraints, and characteristics of the exercise behavior (Sherwood & Jeffery, 2000). Once fitness professionals understand what contributes to participation in exercise, they need to understand the foundational theories to match BCTs to their client’s needs.

## Determinants of Participation in Physical Activity and Exercise

Self-efficacy (i.e., self-confidence) is one of the strongest determinants of physical activity in adults (Choi et al., 2017). An individual’s stage of change and **intention** have also been identified as determinants of behavior (Sherwood & Jeffery, 2000). Job strain and working hours were shown to have an inverse relationship with leisure-time physical activity (Sherwood & Jeffery, 2000). People are also more likely to engage in regular exercise when they have support from people in their home and work environments (Sherwood & Jeffery, 2000). **Self-determination theory** variables, including **autonomous motivation** and perceived competence, have also been found to be related to exercise behavior (Teixeira et al., 2012).

Furthermore, **planning**—a self-regulatory strategy—has positive influences on physical activity (Belanger-Gravel et al., 2013; Karoly et al., 2005; Rovniak et al., 2002). Regular exercisers report higher levels of self-monitoring as well (Karoly et al., 2005; Rovniak et al., 2002). Additionally, one of the most recent reviews identified 40 psychological factors and 13 social factors as being related to physical activity (Choi et al., 2017). Cognitive and emotional factors, **attitudes**, intention, **outcome expectations**, **stress**, **perceived behavioral control**, and selfefficacy have all been identified as associated with physical activity as well (Choi et al., 2017).

## Determinants of Participation in Resistance Training

Resistance training is a unique form of exercise that is likely more challenging to start than aerobic exercise or recreational physical activity. It requires numerous participatory resources, including knowledge of how to design programs and the skills to execute complex movements.

## Key Terms

**Determinants of behavior**
Refers to the psychological, social, or environmental factors that influence behavior.

**Intention**
A construct that captures motivational factors that influence behavior. It indicates how hard people are willing to try and how much effort they are planning to exert.

**Self-determination theory**
A broad theoretical framework for the study of human motivation.

**Autonomous motivation**
When motives for exercise relate to valuing the outcome, when exercise is consistent with the client’s identity, or when the client enjoys exercise.

**Planning**
A concrete representation of when and where exercise will occur.

**Attitudes**
The degree to which a person has a favorable or unfavorable evaluation of the behavior of interest.

**Outcome expectations**
The expected positive and negative consequences of a behavior.

**Stress**
The state of mental or emotional tension from demanding circumstances.

**Perceived behavioral control**
An evaluation of whether one has the means, resources, and opportunities to perform a behavior.