---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: The Initial Session
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
## Discussing Health Concerns

Understanding client health concerns, whether a limitation caused by injury or current health status issue, is crucial for planning a future exercise program. Therefore, fitness professionals must cover health concerns as part of the initial consultation. Being able to link an exercise regimen to the client’s health concerns can be motivating and improve positive outcome expectations and attitudes for the client. Oftentimes, clients will complete a health history questionnaire prior to the first session. Although they may have already done this online or during their club membership sign-up, it is still important to review and discuss any health concerns they may have in person. Clients may also have forgotten to mention a concern, so it is always a best practice for fitness professionals to ask them if there is anything else to be aware of. The conversation about health concerns allows fitness professionals to connect with their clients, hear their concerns, and instill hope for how exercise may help.

## Clarifying Fitness Goals

After establishing a good first impression and discussing health concerns, it is important to talk with clients about their fitness goals. Goals energize performance by motivating people to exert effort, to persist over time, and to direct attention to relevant behaviors and information that can help them achieve their goals (Locke & Latham, 2002). Clients may have vague or overly lofty goals in mind. Vague goals are also known as subjective goals. For these clients, expectations need to be managed with focused outcome and process goals.

It is important that each goal has a measurable objective so that clients have a clear idea of what achieving their goal would look like. Therefore, fitness professionals need to use reflections to clarify what clients mean, rather than trying to interpret what they mean. One simple trick to focus vague goals to something more specific is to ask clients what they think they would be able to accomplish if their goal was reached. For example, if one goal is to lose weight, the client should be asked what losing that weight would enable them to do. Then, that identified potential capability—such as I could run 2 miles faster—can be turned into an outcome subgoal that will help the client stay on track. In this situation, setting a goal to improve the 2-mile run time by 20 seconds provides something tangible to work for, with a set and clear end game.

Goals also need to be frequently reviewed and adjusted. Clients will all progress at different rates, so it is vital to schedule time to discuss how goals will be revisited and reevaluated. It is important to let clients know that it is okay to revise goals, add goals, or delete goals if necessary. Helping clients manage their expectations and giving frequent feedback is essential to keeping them on track.

## Reviewing Previous Exercise Experiences

A past experience regarding exercise can potentially influence an individual’s present opinion of exercise, for better or for worse. If an exercise plan did not work before, presenting a similar solution to a client could prove counterproductive. Therefore, it is imperative to gain an understanding of previous exercise experience to find out what clients did or did not enjoy, and what they think worked and did not work well for them. This requires talking to clients about their exercise history and what they are currently doing. They should be asked how they felt differently when they were exercising compared to now and what they hope to achieve by exercising more regularly again. Fitness professionals may ask some follow-up questions, including:

	- What was the best time of the day for you to exercise?

	- Were you more successful exercising alone or in a class setting?

	- What was the most positive aspect of your previous exercise experience?

	- What led to your quitting?