---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Behavioral Coaching
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Behavioral Coaching

Due to widespread failure to engage in, maintain, or achieve adequate amounts of **physical activity**, effective coaching techniques are needed to promote physical activity and structured exercise. How can successful Certified Personal Trainers work with clients to educate them on the advantages of exercise behavior and long-term **adherence**? To map out a successful intervention for the client, some of the essential elements include identifying the determinants of exercise behavior, understanding theory and techniques to drive behavior change, identifying client needs in the initial session, and determining the most effective style of delivery (which includes effective communication skills). This chapter explores some of the essential elements needed to help identify client needs, motivate them, and help them with self-regulatory issues to assist in exercise adoption and adherence.

## Client Expectations of a Certified Personal Trainer

Certified Personal Trainers can have a significant influence on their clients’ health. Therefore, the fitness professional has a responsibility to design programs, give effective advice, and create environments that help their clients adhere to a fitness routine.

## Key Terms

**Physical activity**
Bodily movement that results in energy expenditure and encompasses many modes and intensities. Movement that is not structured exercise such as recreational pursuits (e.g., golfing, gardening, and walking a dog).

**Adherence**
The level of commitment to a behavior or plan of action.