---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
The second is to help them move past their negative self-talk. Negative self-talk is a form of inner dialogue that critiques a person’s own abilities. Methods to reduce negative self-talk include **reverse listing** and the **stopping** technique. Reverse listing is the practice of identifying a negative inner narrative and replacing it with positive statements. Stopping is a technique of saying “stop” out loud when undesired negative thought patterns are identified. Together, stopping helps break the vicious cycle of negativity while reverse listing helps turn the thoughts into positive ones. Some examples of how fitness professionals can coach a client from a negative to a more positive state include the following:

	- Help clients become aware of their negative thought process by making a list of any negative thoughts they might have toward exercise. Keeping a log can help improve awareness of frequency and content of negative self-talk (Hardy et al., 2009).

	- Help clients come up with a list of positive thoughts they might use toward exercise. For example, I can do it, I can keep going, and I will stick with it.

	- Help clients notice negative thoughts, stop those negative thoughts, and translate those negative thoughts into something positive from the list of positive thoughts they have generated.

	- Remind clients that thoughts are just thoughts. They are simply things that pop in and out of the conscious mind and do not represent who a person is or what a person may or may not be capable of.

	- Remind clients of their goals when they demonstrate negative self-talk.

**Cognitive fusion** occurs when people believe the exact content of their own thoughts and can be problematic with negative self-talk. Rather than a futile debate over whether negative thoughts are true or false, fitness professionals should use motivational interviewing techniques to help the client work through mental roadblocks. For example, asking clients, “If you let this thought be true, would it help you reach your goals?” is one way to help them realize the negative value of a thought for themselves.

### IMAGERY

Using mental **imagery** is the process of imagining a situation and experiences that support or enhance exercise participation. Clients can imagine themselves approaching exercise or physical activity with greater confidence. They can mentally rehearse their performances with positive feelings and outcomes, and they can imagine positive outcomes to contribute to continued motivation. Imagery may improve self-confidence, either directly or through reducing anxiety (Kossert & Munroe-Chandler, 2007). Clients who mentally picture themselves with a higher performance level can gain confidence and perform better.

Clients may use imagery as well to enhance their outcome expectancies of what they will gain from an exercise program (Kossert & Munroe-Chandler, 2007) and may use a variety of different imagery techniques.

**Appearance imagery** is when a client imagines appearance or health-related outcomes. **Energy imagery** refers to mental images used to increase energy and relieve stress (e.g., I will feel good when I exercise).

## Key Terms

**Reverse listing**
Replacing negative statements with positive statements.

**Stopping**
The act of saying “stop” out loud to undesired statements.

**Cognitive fusion**
When people believe the exact content of their own thoughts.

**Imagery**
The process created to produce internalized experiences.

**Appearance imagery**
When a person imagines appearance or healthrelated outcomes.

**Energy imagery**
When a person creates mental images that increase energy and/or relieve stress.