---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Importance of Effective Communication Skills
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
Linking summaries are a bit more robust and serve to tie together information presented over an entire conversation, or even multiple conversations over time. These help keep longer-term discussions, especially as they relate to changing habits, in line with the greater vision of the fitness program. And transitional summaries, as the name suggests, are summarizing statements used to wrap up one topic before moving to the next. These would be used, for example, when a client finishes discussing health concerns before moving on to talking about a potential fitness plan.

### USING AFFIRMATIONS

**Affirmations** show appreciation for clients and their strengths. Fitness professionals must listen carefully to know what to affirm. Affirmations are positive statements about the client’s character strengths (Clifford & Curtis, 2016) and are different than compliments. Compliments use “I” statements (“I think you are working really hard at this”) and put attention onto the fitness professional, not the client. Affirmations (“You paid very close attention to technique today”), on the other hand, acknowledge the client’s strengths and efforts and can be used to enhance a client’s self-efficacy for change. An affirmation communicates an appreciation of clients for who they are. Some benefits of affirmation include enhancing self-efficacy, encouraging persistence, decreasing defensiveness, supporting momentum for change, and improving client’s feelings of support (Clifford & Curtis, 2016).

### ASKING PERMISSION

Being the expert, Certified Personal Trainers typically have more knowledge on relevant and helpful information than the client has. However, it is important to recognize that people respond best when they have the autonomy to make their own choices instead of being told what to do. While there are situations such as boot camps and certain clients who prefer a “drill instructor” style of coaching, many personal training clients—especially those new to exercise— may be intimidated and uncomfortable by this approach. This is especially true if they are new to exercise or have never used a certain piece of equipment. Asking first puts the decision in the clients’ hands and will help them to be more open to new experiences. For example, asking questions like, Do you want to try a fun new technique? or What cardio equipment would you like to use for your warm-up? can go a long way toward empowering a client’s self-efficacy.

Additionally, people do not like to be “talked at” if no desire to learn something new has been communicated. Clients are paying fitness professionals to share information with them. However, it is still highly important to ask permission to share any information the client did not ask for first. Asking for permission to share information allows clients to retain their autonomy while making it easier for them to hear what the Certified Personal Trainer has to say. The simple act of asking first honors respect, choice, collaboration, and the life experiences the client is already bringing to the encounter (Miller & Rollnick, 2013).

## Key Terms

**Affirmations**
Positive statements about character strengths.