---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
Action planning and self-monitoring will be covered in subsequent sections. Giving praise to clients for their attempts at achieving goals may result in higher self-efficacy and greater levels of physical activity. This kind of positive feedback enhances confidence by focusing on small successes in the process (Williams & French, 2011).

If a client improves on any metric of fitness, it is important to give positive feedback and praise. This is particularly important in the beginning stages of behavior change when the client has not yet achieved mastery of certain exercises or skills. Praise can help to enhance a client’s confidence in their abilities. Eliciting social support may also enhance a client’s sense of control over exercise. Feeling supported by others may help an individual cope with any setbacks or obstacles as well (Olander et al., 2013).

### PLANNING

Planning can help translate intentions to behavior. Engaging in exercise requires clients to plan what they are going to do and where they are going to do it. Making a personal training appointment along with a financial commitment to show up is a clear example of making plans to achieve a goal. However, clients should also be encouraged to exercise on their own; therefore, discussing planning techniques with clients is a good strategy to help foster these behaviors.

Two planning behavior change techniques that are often used are called **implementation intentions** and **coping plans**. Implementation intentions are specific plans that drive behavior by identifying cues toward action. By forming an implementation intention, a client connects the exercise routine with a specific event, such as during a lunch break or after work. Implementation intentions have shown to be effective at promoting exercise and physical activity.

While implementation intentions refer to when, where, and how to exercise, coping plans involve anticipating barriers and creating alternative plans (Sniehotta et al., 2005). Both action plans and coping plans have been found to have positive effects on physical activity (Belanger-Gravel et al., 2013). Yet, planning as a behavior change technique is not effective for everyone. For example, planning does not translate good intentions into behavior for people who have low self-efficacy (Koring et al. 2012; Lippke et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2016). Therefore, discussion around planning might not be ideal for individuals in the contemplation stage of change. Furthermore, identifying barriers and reasons why a client cannot exercise may reduce self-efficacy by drawing attention to potential failures (Williams & French, 2011). A better approach may be to review barriers that have already arisen and collaborate on plans to work around them if they happen again, and subsequently waiting to brainstorm additional, potential barriers until higher levels of self-efficacy have been determined.

#### TRAINING TIP

One way for new fitness clients to develop an effective implementation intention is to encourage them to link their plan to a specific behavior that already exists during the timeframe in which they want to exercise. For example, say a client wants to start jogging in the morning and always starts the day with a few cups of coffee before going to work. You might suggest scheduling time to run after the first cup of coffee. The client’s implementation intention for this would be, “Once I am done with my first cup of coffee, I will go for a quick 20-minute jog.” Have your client repeat the specific intention three times before the end of each session as a mantra that can help them stick to the plan.

## Key Terms

**Implementation intentions**
A behavior change technique that links a goal-directed response to situational cues by specifying when, where, and how to act.

**Coping plans**
A behavior change technique that involves anticipating barriers to goal action and proactively preparing strategies that prioritize intentional behavior over counterproductive habitual responses.