---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
### SELF-MONITORING

Self-monitoring provides information needed for setting realistic goals and assessing progress toward those goals. Self-monitoring allows individuals to identify external triggers that lead them to behave in certain ways (Bandura, 1991). Clients cannot influence their intentions and behavior if they do not pay attention to their performance, the conditions that contribute to behavior, and the effects of their behavior. Self-monitoring provides clients the information they need to evaluate their progress toward goals. If clients can monitor their thought patterns and behaviors along with the conditions under which the behaviors may or may not occur, they may notice precursors of behavior (Bandura, 1991). For example, clients may notice they are less likely to exercise if they plan to go after work, if they forget to pack clothes, or if they do not get a good night’s sleep. Fitness professionals can encourage clients to modify things in their lives and take notes of specific changes in behavior.

If clients pay close attention to exercise performance, they will be more likely to notice improvements and set progressive goals. Self-monitoring is usually done in the form of a daily written record of the behavior that a client is trying to change. For example, clients who are new to exercise should keep an exercise log to both track their progress and maintain accountability to the program. Similarly, individuals on a weight loss journey will greatly benefit from keeping a food intake journal (i.e., a diet record; **Figure 4-6**) so they can objectively monitor their daily calories.

[**](https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CPT7_diet_record_worksheet.pdf?cb=2025-04-18T19:.5684533)Figure 4-6Diet record worksheet

## Images

**Figure 4-6: Diet record worksheet**
Alt: Trainer and client discussing her progress at the gym; Shutterstock ID 330209729; Business Unit: NASM; Project Name: CPT7; ISBN or Project Number: NSM-01257
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH04_fig4.6_DRW_thumbnail.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533