---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: The Initial Session
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
Clients may also have worked with other fitness professionals in the past. This makes it important to ask them what their previous training plans did well and what they liked most about the experience. Take in information on why previous attempts at exercising came up short and ask clients about barriers they may have run into. It is important for clients to identify barriers that may disrupt current exercise habits. By anticipating potential barriers, Certified Personal Trainers can help clients create plans to work around barriers. Barriers that people experience are likely related to the determinants of exercise, such as a perceived lack of time, lack of motivation, nonenjoyment, boredom, lack of confidence, injury, or lack of support. Each barrier the client identifies will likely necessitate an individualized approach.

## Finalizing the Program

After gaining a good sense of the client’s subjective health concerns, goals, and past exercise experience, a fitness professional needs to assess the client’s fitness to determine an exercise starting point. To accomplish this, NASM recommends the use of various fitness assessments (discussed in Chapters 11 and 12) that provide clear, objective information about a client’s movement quality and fitness level. The combination of subjective and objective information will inform the design of the exercise program.

The exercise program should be designed after the initial consultation is over and presented to clients during their first official training session. With so much to accomplish during the initial session, there may not be enough time to do it then. Individualized fitness plans require careful thought and consideration, so it should be explained to the clients that their program will be personalized and waiting for them when they next arrive.

### HELP CLIENTS ANTICIPATE THE PROCESS

Understanding the process and what is coming next can make exercise much less intimidating. At the end of the first meeting, the Certified Personal Trainer should speak with the client about the following topics:

	- Are they ready to continue with the exercise program?

	- Would they like any more information on anything that was discussed?

	- Do they have everything they need to exercise additionally on their own?

	- Do they have any other questions or concerns?

#### TRAINING TIP

During your initial session with a client, keep this checklist in mind:

	- Discuss health concerns.

	- Clarify fitness goals.

	- Review past exercise experiences.

	- Perform a comprehensive fitness assessment.

Once complete and your client leaves, design an exercise program based on all the information that was gathered. Then, present the program to your client at your next session and provide clear expectations so they can anticipate the process.

Additionally, if possible, clients should be introduced to other members of the facility. Clients will always feel more comfortable if they know more people at a health club, which helps foster a greater sense of community that will boost their motivation and keep them coming back for more.