---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Health Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Side effects include dizziness, headache, reduced bone density, coma, congenital birth defects, and even death (Institute of Medicine, 2001). Vitamin D may be referred to as the “sunshine” vitamin because it can be naturally produced in the skin when exposed to ultraviolet light. In animals, vitamin D is produced from cholesterol following activation by sunlight.

Vitamin D plays a critical role, along with calcium, in bone health. Despite the increased interest in the health benefits of vitamin D, the medical community has yet to agree on recommended blood levels of vitamin D. Because vitamin D levels are influenced so heavily by diet and lifestyle, broad nutritional intake recommendations are difficult to prescribe accurately. Vitamin D deficiency is common in many countries, including the United States where up to 39% of the population is labeled as deficient, Europe with a 40% deficiency rate, 60% in the Middle East, 30% in Asia, and 60% in Australia (Edwards et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2018). People with vitamin D deficiency often include those with **lactose intolerance**, dairy allergies, **irritable bowel syndrome**, and other conditions causing malabsorption, as well as individuals with dark skin, those living in northern latitudes, vegetarians, and vegans (Institute of Medicine, 2011). Inadequate vitamin D status may produce **rickets**, weak bones, increased risk of bone fracture, and **osteoporosis**.

Reaching intake levels that may produce toxicity effects is likely only possible through supplementation. Excess vitamin D can cause weight loss, excessive urination, and **heart arrhythmias**. When supplemented with calcium, there is also an increased risk for kidney stones as well as vascular and tissue calcification (Institute of Medicine, 2011).

# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Vitamin D levels are measured in the body as 25-hydroxy-vitamin D, which in most people is between 20 and 40 ng/mL (nanograms per milliliter). While the National Academy of Medicine considers 20 ng/mL adequate for good bone health, the Endocrine Society recommends 30 ng/mL as the minimum for good bone health and that optimal levels may be between 40 and 60 ng/mL. Per the Endocrine Society, daily vitamin D intake should be 1,500–2,000 international units (IU) per day (38–50 mcg). The tolerable upper limit is 4,000 IU per day.

Vitamin E is best known for being an antioxidant and may reduce inflammation, **platelet aggregation**, risk of heart disease and cancer, and **immunodeficiency** (Institute of Medicine, 2000). Vitamin E deficiency is rare even in those with low vitamin E intake and occurs mostly in those with other digestive diseases as a result of malabsorption. Vitamin E deficiency symptoms include **peripheral neuropathy**, **skeletal myopathy**, and compromised immune function. There have been no adverse health effects observed by consuming vitamin E from food. However, supplementing vitamin E in high doses has been observed to cause excessive bleeding (Traber, 2008).

## Key Terms

**Lactose intolerance**
A sensitivity to lactose (milk sugar) typically resulting in gastrointestinal distress.

**Irritable bowel syndrome**
Gastrointestinal discomfort, sometimes severe, triggered by certain foods but is not a food allergy.

**Rickets**
A bone weakness disease caused by vitamin D deficiency.

**Osteoporosis**
A condition of reduced bone mineral density, which increases risk of bone fracture.

**Heart arrhythmias**
Irregular heartbeat.

**Platelet aggregation**
An accumulation of blood cells prior to a clot.

**Immunodeﬁciency**
A weakened immune system.

**Peripheral neuropathy**
Nerve damage not occurring in the brain or spinal cord.

**Skeletal myopathy**
Muscle degeneration.