---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Ergogenic Aids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Ergogenic Aids

Clients will want to know how to reach their goals as fast as possible, thus they will likely ask if an **ergogenic aid** will help them toward that end. Many supplements claim to improve fat loss, strength, or muscle gain, but few are rigorously substantiated. The fitness professional should be able to guide clients toward safe supplements that may yield results consistent with their goals and away from unsafe or counterproductive supplements. The fitness professional should also be prudent in recommending ergogenic aids, as clients may perceive they can use supplements as a substitute for an appropriate diet and exercise plan. For example, clients may believe they can eat extra dessert because they are taking a new fat burner, which may negate or reverse progress. Caution must also be practiced when recommending supplements, as there is a liability in doing so, and the risk is more notable with some ergogenic aids than with health supplements.

Ergogenic aids are the type of dietary supplement people think of when they think of sports supplements. The word *ergogenic* is derived of two parts: *Ergo* meaning “work,” and *genic* meaning “to produce.” From the physical perspective, increasing the body’s ability to produce work is the underlying purpose of using a supplement for performance enhancement—the athlete desires to improve some aspect of their ability to exert force, perform longer, or recover faster.

While there is a myriad of ergogenic aids available, a few have more substantiated effects than others. Any supplements left unmentioned in this chapter does not mean they are ineffective; they are simply beyond the scope of this text. The most widely supported ergogenic aids are protein and amino acids, creatine, and caffeine.

## Key Terms

**Ergogenic aid**
A dietary supplement that may enhance performance or body composition; it may also be referred to as a performance supplement.