---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Health Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### MACROMINERALS

The macrominerals are calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, chloride, and sulfur (**Figure 10-6**). The nomenclature is used to describe the relative quantities that are required for these minerals, which are much larger than the trace minerals. Despite being needed in large quantities, most are not typically used as supplements unless included as a small percentage of a multivitamin or, in the case of sodium and chloride, as salt.

Calcium is best known for its role in bone health. Like most mineral supplements, calcium mineral supplements come in many forms. Calcium carbonate, citrate, and phosphate are all suitable for increasing calcium levels. Calcium citrate is the most easily absorbed, but calcium carbonate has nearly double the amount of calcium per milligram of supplement, making both comparable in performance when supplemented (Harvey et al., 1990). Calcium phosphate is easily absorbed and has comparable proportions of calcium to the carbonate form, but it is often more expensive (Shires & Kessler, 1990).

##### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Calcium plays a key role in muscle contraction. At the microlevel, calcium occupies binding sites between muscle filaments. When a muscle needs to contract, calcium moves off the binding site, allowing the filaments to connect and the muscle to contract.

Those at risk of calcium deficiency include women, particularly postmenopausal, **amenorrheic**, and physically active women for their elevated risk of **osteopenia** and osteoporosis, and vegetarians. **Lacto-ovo vegetarians** have comparable calcium levels to nonvegetarians, but strict vegetarians, **ovo-vegetarians**, and vegans are at greater risk of insufficient calcium intake due to reduced intake as well as the *antinutrients* present in plants, which reduce calcium absorption. These groups of individuals may find benefits from supplementing calcium, but calcium also has a risk of toxicity. **Hypercalcemia** typically does not occur without a pre-existing thyroid disorder, though the potential exists for soft tissue calcification, constipation, and kidney stones.

##### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Antinutrients are common components of many plants. Antinutrients decrease absorption of other important nutrients, such as calcium and iron. The most common antinutrients are phytic acid, oxalic acid, and enzyme inhibitors. For example, legumes (beans, peas, and lentils) have protein-enzyme inhibitors. This contributes to incomplete digestion and eventual fermentation in the large intestine, which releases gasses into the gastrointestinal tract. Soaking beans and other plants can help reduce the antinutrient content.

## Key Terms

**Amenorrheic**
Absence of menstruation.

**Osteopenia**
Lower than normal bone density and a precursor to osteoporosis.

**Lacto-ovo vegetarian**
A vegetarian diet that also includes dairy and eggs.

**Ovo-vegetarian**
A vegetarian diet that also includes eggs.

**Hypercalcemia**
Excess blood calcium levels.

## Images

**Figure 10-6: Macrominerals**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH10_FIGF06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533