---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Health Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Many of the health benefits of fish oil concern cardiovascular disease. Fish oil is effective for reducing **triglycerides** (Wei & Jacobson, 2011). Fish oil may also improve other risk factors of cardiovascular disease, such as raising high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels and reducing inflammation (Dangardt et al., 2010; Zulyniak et al., 2013). Recall that high-density lipoprotein cholesterol is sometimes referred to as “good” cholesterol because it removes excess cholesterol from the bloodstream and transports it back to the liver. Beyond cardiovascular health, fish oil may reduce depression and symptoms of lupus (Sarris et al., 2012; Wright et al., 2008). DHA, in particular, has known benefits on brain health and protection from an absence of oxygen in body tissues (hypoxia) (Mayurasakorn et al., 2011). A study on National Collegiate Athletic Association division 1 football players supplementing with escalating doses of DHA were observed to have better protection from brain trauma, with 2 g per day appearing to be the optimal dose (Oliver et al., 2016). These effects likely extend to all athletes with a predisposed risk of head trauma. An upper limit for omega-3 has not been established, but excess bleeding has been noted with doses of 2–15 g of combined EPA and DHA (Institute of Medicine, 2005).

## Key Terms

**Triglycerides**
The chemical or substrate form in which most fat exists in food as well as in the body.