---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Fitness, nutrition, and supplementation are often viewed as a package; thus, the fitness professional is frequently asked questions about supplementation by clients and others who want an expert’s opinion. In the gym setting, Certified Personal Trainers may be asked by their employer to sell supplements to clients or other members. Fitness professionals may also find opportunities as influencers for supplement companies on social media or other platforms. While supplement use may appear commonplace in the fitness community, fitness professionals must know, and stay within, their scope of practice, understanding their responsibilities and liabilities concerning dietary supplements.

## What Are Dietary Supplements?

What began as a product to conveniently add nutrients that may otherwise be absent or insufficient from the diet has expanded to include several other compounds. The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 describes a **dietary supplement** as a product (other than tobacco) intended to supplement the diet that bears or contains one or more of the following dietary ingredients: vitamin, mineral, herb or other botanical, amino acid; a substance used by man to supplement the diet by increasing total dietary intake; or a concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or combination of any previously described ingredient.

Supplements are intended to be exactly that—supplemental. They are not a foundational component of a diet, and they are not to be represented for use as a food item. All dietary supplements are delivered orally as a capsule, powder, softgel, liquid, or other form. They may not be administered by transdermal, injection, or other means, as these administration methods are reserved for pharmaceuticals. Unlike pharmaceuticals, dietary supplements need not receive prior approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be sold or marketed in most countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom. Without prior approval, supplements are sometimes referred to as unregulated, which is not entirely true, because regulations do exist. However, the absence of prior approval or oversight until after their release means that the quality, strength, and purity of a dietary supplement is directly and wholly in the hands of the company, which may or may not be trustworthy. Differences exist from country to country on which dietary supplement ingredients are permitted. In general, the United States and Australia are lenient, whereas Europe and Asia are less permissive.

## Rationale for the Use of Dietary Supplements

Dietary supplements may be used for a wide range of reasons. A 2018 survey from the Council for Responsible Nutrition (2018) reported that 75% of adults in the United States and 40% of Australians use at least one dietary supplement (Burnett et al., 2017). The reasons for their use differ between age groups. For example, younger demographics often cite their reasons for dietary supplement use as weight management, immune health, energy, and beauty, while older demographics use supplements to fill nutrient gaps and for specific health concerns, including bone, heart, and joint health.

Other reasons for dietary supplement use can include accelerating recovery from sport injury or intense exercise to enhance cognition and attention; improving performance outcomes, such as strength or endurance; or altering body composition. Others may use supplements for specific health needs, and in some cases, they are prescribed by a physician, such as after surgery, during pregnancy, or to counter drug–nutrient interactions. Despite the many reasons one may decide to use a dietary supplement, the most common reason cited is overall wellness.

## Key Terms

**Dietary supplement**
A product (other than tobacco) intended to supplement the diet that bears or contains one or more of the following dietary ingredients: vitamin; mineral; herb or other botanical; amino acid; substance used by man to supplement the diet by increasing the total dietary intake; or concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or combination of any previously described ingredient.