---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Ergogenic Aids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Optimal caffeine dosing is 3–6 mg/kg (1.4–2.7 mg/lb) body weight provided about 1 hour prior to exercise (Goldstein et al., 2010). Doses greater than 6 mg/kg (2.7 mg/lb) increase the potential for an adverse and impairing effect. About 85–90% of individuals respond favorably to caffeine supplementation (Pickering & Kiely, 2018).

Caffeine use is common, and in regard to fitness, it is commonly used as a preworkout supplement or fat-burning supplement. Fitness professionals should use caution when discussing stimulants, including caffeine, to clients, and they should never recommend a stimulant if their client is using any medication or has a medical condition. Always refer clients fitting this description to their physician for their recommendation on caffeine or other stimulants. Healthy clients may still engage in caffeine use if they find it beneficial for their exercise performance, energy levels, or body composition improvements. Although caffeine may release stored body fat and increase metabolic rate, Certified Personal Trainers assume some risk if they choose to recommend caffeine to their clients. Caffeine alone may not make much of an impact for fat loss unless paired with green tea or ephedra, which is a banned substance and cannot be recommended under any circumstances. Caffeine may have unwanted side effects in doses greater than 400 mg, or less in caffeine-naïve individuals and those with a predisposition to adverse effects of caffeine, and it becomes lethal near 10 g. Common side effects include restlessness, insomnia, increased heart rate (at rest), nervousness, anxiety, and gastrointestinal distress.

## Ethical and Legal Issues with Ergogenic Aids

With the abundance of dietary supplements available, and their route to market being left mostly unchecked until something goes wrong, there are several concerns with using ergogenic aids that the fitness professional should know and understand before educating clients on their use. The first concern is whether the supplement will work at all, which can be determined by looking for studies from reputable resources, such as PubMed or Google Scholar, or position papers from the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, National Athletic Trainers Association, International Society of Sports Nutrition, and other reputable organizations.

If the product is then considered worth using, the second concern is whether it is legal and safe to use. In certain situations, there is also the question of ethics, which may be regulated by organizations such as the NCAA or WADA. While supplements are often considered legal, they are not always permitted in sport due to the rules of the sports federation. The NCAA currently reserves the right to ban any substance, and WADA publishes annually a list of banned substances, which is available on its website. The NCAA or WADA may ban certain supplements because they consider that the supplements may offer an uncompetitive advantage, mask the use of other drugs, or pose a health risk. These agencies may ban a supplement during certain times of the competitive year or prohibit institutionalized provision of supplements only. Therefore, not all supplements banned by the NCAA or WADA are pertinent to the everyday client.

### TRY THIS

Next time you would like to know something about a dietary supplement, look up what you would like to know in Google Scholar or PubMed. Begin with a narrative review or meta-analysis if you are unfamiliar with the topic, as these will sum up many studies at once and may offer indications of the quality of the research reviewed. For dietary supplement research, a good quality study will feature a placebo-controlled group, diet and exercise monitoring or standardization, a human population sample similar to the user group (those who may want to use the supplement), and a research-supported dose of the supplement and will not be confounded by multiple ingredients.