---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Supplementation Guidelines and Labels
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Other information that may be found on a dietary supplement label includes a product description, suggested use directions, warnings, and claims. Product descriptions, suggested use, and claims are provided by the company, and they are mostly unregulated. Claims cannot be made unless there is reasonable scientific support for the claim, and this is common to most countries, including the United States, Australia, and the European Union. In the United States, all claims must carry a disclaimer that the product is not intended to treat, cure, prevent, or diagnose a disease and that claims made were not reviewed by the FDA.

Warnings may vary widely. Allergen statements are required for products containing allergens, such as whey protein containing dairy. Allergen warnings are also required if the equipment used to process the dietary supplement also processes any of the eight common allergens: peanuts, tree nuts, soy, egg, dairy, wheat (gluten), fish, and shellfish.

# CRITICAL

Know the eight allergens that may be listed on a supplement facts panel or nutrition facts panel. Ensure that clients with a food allergy know to check the labels of their supplements just as they would check food items.

A general warning may be provided to indicate that the product is not to be used by individuals younger than the age of 18 years; should not be used with other supplements, medications, or by those with a known medical condition; needs to be kept cool and dry; and/or lists warnings regarding specific ingredients. One common specific ingredient warning is the total caffeine content. The contents of the general warning are determined by the dietary supplement company. The warning required by the FDA is, “These statements have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease” (U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, 2019c), which will be found on every dietary supplement product abiding to U.S. law.

Supplement fact labels can also differ slightly depending on the supplement type. For example, **Figure 10-1** is a supplement facts label from a brand of protein powder. Note the serving size, servings per container, and the amounts provided for each nutrient listed: calories, calories from fat, total fat, total carbohydrate, dietary fiber, sugars, protein, calcium, iron, and sodium. Amounts for vitamins A and C and other micronutrients are not listed because they are not present in any measurable amount. Because the supplement is a protein blend and claims to provide all the essential amino acids, the manufacturer has chosen to list all the amino acids provided on the supplement label.

In contrast, **Figure 10-2** is a supplement label for a calcium and vitamin D supplement, and it only lists information for calories, calories from fat, and the amounts of vitamin D and calcium provided in one serving. Carbohydrates, sugar, fiber, protein, and vitamins A and C have been omitted due to an insignificant amount of each being present. Keep in mind, supplement labels only need to list what is present, unlike food labels, which must provide more detail, such as a listing of calories, macronutrients, and certain micronutrients.

**Figure 10-1 Dietary supplement label**Figure 10-2 Calcium supplement label

## Images

**Figure 10-1: Dietary supplement label**
Alt: Dietary supplement label.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH10_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 10-2: Calcium supplement label**
Alt: Calcium supplement list
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH10_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533