---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Ergogenic Aids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
There is also the possibility of contamination, which is why athletes and exercisers may want to only use dietary supplements with third-party verification (Informed Choice or NSF). As much as 25% of dietary supplements may be adulterated with a banned substance (Geyer et al., 2004). The FDA maintains an online database of products that have been found to contain hidden ingredients not listed on the label, such as banned substances and prescription medications.

### BANNED SUBSTANCES

Some dietary supplements enter the market as legal but are eventually reclassified. In recent history, this has occurred with some stimulants, and further back in history, there was a time that anabolic steroids were not banned from use in competitive sports. While some banned substances by WADA or NCAA are not always dangerous, most are confined to prescription drugs and are not legal for everyday use.

Beyond caffeine, many stimulants are considered banned substances in one country or another. The United States is relatively liberal on stimulant use, allowing stimulants, such as hordenine (a chemical found in barley) and yohimbine (derived from the bark of an evergreen tree found in Africa). By contrast, Great Britain only allows caffeine in dietary supplements. Two of the more well-known stimulants banned in the United States are **DMAA** (dimethylamylamine) and **ephedra** (an herb containing ephedrine and other stimulants). DMAA and ephedra were banned following reports of **serious adverse effects**, including several deaths resulting from cardiovascular stimulation.

Anabolic steroids are another class of ergogenic aids. These steroids are derived from a **hormone precursor**, usually **testosterone**, and are used primarily for increasing muscle mass and strength and the loss of body fat. Some side effects of steroids can be permanent, such as **gynecomastia** (swollen male breast tissue) and hair loss, while others are transient, only occurring while the individual uses steroids, such as aggression (Hoffman & Ratamess, 2006). A list of side effects can be found in **Table 10-7**.

**TABLE 10-7 Potential Adverse Effects of Anabolic Steroids**

| Men | Women |
|---|---|
| Acne | Development of masculine features |
| Loss of head hair | Increased body and facial hair |
| Gynecomastia (development of breasts) | Deepening of voice |
| Irritability and aggression | Irritability and aggression |
| Altered sex drive (increased or decreased) | Altered sex drive (increased or decreased) |
| Sleeplessness | Fluid retention |
| Testicular atrophy | Menstruation irregularities |
| Decreased sperm count | Breast atrophy |
| Worsened cholesterol profiles | Clitoral enlargement |
| Prostate enlargement | Acne |

## Key Terms

**DMAA**
Dimethylamylamine; a stimulant and amphetamine once legal for use as a dietary supplement.

**Ephedra**
A plant-sourced alkaloid with metabolism-enhancing effects. It is an illegal supplement in the United States and the European Union.

**Serious adverse effect**
Any adverse effect that results in any life-threatening situation, inpatient hospitalization, persistent incapacity of a person’s ability to conduct a normal life, a congenital anomaly, reproductive harm, or death.

**Hormone precursor**
A hormone used to create another hormone or hormone-like agent.

**Testosterone**
A hormone producing secondary male sex characteristics.

**Gynecomastia**
A condition in males characterized by breast tissue growth.