---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Ergogenic Aids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Although the types of protein consumed are a significant factor, the most important consideration for clients is their total daily protein intake. Inactive individuals need less protein than active persons and athletes. Because more intense exercise causes more muscle damage, these individuals require more protein to facilitate recovery. Clients who were previously inactive and are now becoming active will have increased protein needs. In some cases, this is a large change to their lifestyle, and the client may find it difficult.

Because this quantity of protein may be more difficult to obtain through diet alone, many choose to include a protein shake. This is often the easiest way to help clients obtain more protein in their diet because it is simple and easy to implement. Protein powders are available as protein concentrates (80% protein) or isolates (90% protein). The remaining 10–20% is composed of moisture, calcium, ash, carbohydrate (lactose), and fat. Unless the individual has a strong need to tightly control carbohydrate and fat intake, a protein concentrate is the most cost-effective strategy to increase protein without increasing intake of other macronutrients. Alternatively, EAA may be supplemented in place of protein for a comparable increase in MPS for those clients needing fewer calories, with aversions to allergens, and who adhere to a special diet, and for a reduced potential for gastric distress (Wilkinson et al., 2018).

While protein shakes are often thought of as essential for postexercise recovery, the postexercise timeframe is actually larger than most realize. With the understanding that there is no reason *not* to consume protein shortly after exercise, also consider that a meta-analysis of 20 studies for muscle growth and 23 for muscle strength found no statistically significant effect of postworkout protein consumption when total daily protein intake is equal (Schoenfeld et al., 2013). Consuming protein following an exercise session is still an opportunity to contribute to total daily protein intake. Also, on the topic of timing, consumption of leucine-enriched EAA supplements during exercise may help jumpstart postexercise recovery and assist in reducing muscle catabolism (Pasiakos et al., 2011). EAA supplements typically contain disproportionately high quantities of leucine versus other EAAs—usually several grams, among 6–10 g of total EAA.

The fitness professional can appropriately guide clients toward sufficient protein intake that aligns with their fitness goals. While protein is often thought of as a muscle-building supplement, it is more of a recovery supplement (and an essential component of a client’s diet) that builds muscle when the client is consuming adequate calories and performing resistance training. Fitness professionals help their clients by translating their protein needs into portion sizes that correspond with their number of meals. For example, an 80 kg (176 lb) client requiring 120 g of protein per day and eating three meals per day can be recommended to consume 40 g per meal (equivalent to 5–6 oz of lean meat per meal). If that same client reports having trouble with that pattern, it may be best for their compliance to view a protein shake as a fourth meal and recommend four meals of 30 g each. In this scenario, the client can consume three meals of 4–5 oz of lean meat and then one protein shake after training, in the morning for breakfast, or after dinner for dessert. Individuals who do not consume meat can follow a similar plan but substitute their meals with soy and other plant-protein foods, though the exact quantities are more variable.

## Creatine Supplementation

Many clients’ fitness goals center on building muscle size or strength. Protein and amino acids may certainly help facilitate this goal, and creatine is another supplement with substantial evidence for adding mass, strength, and fatigue resistance. Creatine supplementation is a simple way for individuals to maximize their training potential.

Aleksandra Gigowska/Shutterstock.com

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH10_UNNUN07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533