---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The **autonomic nervous system** supplies neural input to organs that run the involuntary processes of the body (e.g., circulating blood, digesting food, producing hormones). In other words, these things happen without a person having to consciously think about them thanks to the autonomic nervous system. The autonomic system is then further subdivided into the **sympathetic** and **parasympathetic nervous systems**.

During exercise, the sympathetic nervous system works to increase neural activity and signals different endocrine organs to release hormones, such as adrenaline, that increase heart rate, breathing, and alertness. This process is often termed *fight or flight*, where the body is put into a more excited (i.e., heightened) state in anticipation of an increase in activity.

The parasympathetic nervous system has the opposite effect and works to decrease neural activity by suspending the release of excitatory hormones. This puts the body in a more relaxed state, which is often termed *rest and digest*. Both systems work together to balance bodily functions and manage interactions with the surrounding world (Waxenbaum & Varacallo, 2019).

## Functions of the Nervous System

The three primary functions of the nervous system include sensory, integrative, and motor functions. **Sensory function** is the ability of the nervous system to sense changes in either the internal or external environment (Ludwig & Varacallo, 2019). For example, internally, the nervous system can sense a stretch placed on a muscle; externally, the nervous system uses the primary senses—sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing—to gather information about the environment outside of the body. Sensory feedback, both internal and external, travels from the PNS to the CNS through the afferent pathway.

A key sensory function of the human body is **proprioception**, which is the body’s ability to naturally sense its general orientation and the relative position of all its parts (Greenbaum-Maya, 2019). For example, when people shoot a basketball, proprioception helps them feel their arm and hand placement while focusing their attention on the basket. It is not necessary for them to look at their arms to realize that they are positioned overhead to shoot the ball; the body’s own proprioceptive abilities provide that information. Training the body’s proprioceptive abilities can improve balance, coordination, and posture and enable the body to adapt to its surroundings without consciously thinking about what movement is most appropriate for any given situation. Therefore, it becomes important to train the nervous system efficiently to ensure that proper movement patterns are being developed, which enhances performance and may decrease the risk of injury.

### TRY THIS

To better understand the concept of proprioception, try the following:

	- Close your eyes.

	- Raise your left hand above your head.

	- Raise your right hand above your head.

	- Return both arms to your sides at the same time.

Think about how you were able to perform this task without using your five senses. You couldn’t see, smell, taste, hear, or touch your arms, yet somehow you knew exactly where your arms were positioned at any given time. That internal sense of body orientation is proprioception.

For a real test of your proprioceptive abilities, hold your arms out to your sides and then try touching your nose with your left and right pointer fingers with your eyes closed! Were you able to do it?

## Key Terms

**Autonomic nervous system**
A division of the peripheral nervous system that supplies neural input to organs that run the involuntary processes of the body (e.g., circulating blood, digesting food, producing hormones).

**Sympathetic nervous system**
Subdivision of the autonomic nervous system that works to increase neural activity and put the body in a heightened state.

**Parasympathetic nervous system**
Subdivision of the autonomic nervous system that works to decrease neural activity and put the body in a more relaxed state.

**Sensory function**
Ability of the nervous system to sense changes in either the internal or external environment.

**Proprioception**
The body’s ability to naturally sense its general orientation and relative position of its parts.