---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### NERVOUS SYSTEM SUBDIVISIONS

Two further subdivisions of the PNS include the somatic and autonomic nervous systems (**Figure 5-4**) (Waxenbaum & Varacallo, 2019). The **somatic nervous system** consists of nerves that serve the outer areas of the body and skeletal muscle and is largely responsible for the voluntary control of movement.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

**Reflexes in Action**

The central and peripheral nervous systems work together to process information about the surrounding world to produce purposeful responses. Quite often, those responses happen without any conscious awareness, which is known as a reflex.

For example, when people put their finger over a hot flame, they will begin to feel the extreme heat. In response, they quickly withdraw their hand to avoid pain or possible damage to their skin. The entire loop—sensing the heat, transmitting the information to the CNS, processing that information as painful and dangerous, and then sending the command for arm muscles to contract and move the hand away from the flame—happens almost instantaneously. This example of sensory information being processed to produce a motor response is called the withdrawal reflex (Eckert & Riley, 2013).

## Key Terms

**Somatic nervous system**
Nerves that serve the outer areas of the body and skeletal muscle and are largely responsible for the voluntary control of movement.

## Images

**Figure 5-4: Nervous system flowchart**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-4: ) (Waxenbaum & Varacallo, 2019). The somatic nervous system consists of nerves that serve the outer areas of the body and skeletal muscle and is largely responsible for the voluntary control of movement.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_UNNUN03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533