---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Muscular System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## The Structure of the Skeletal Muscle

**Skeletal muscle** is made up of individual muscle fibers held together by connective tissues (Floyd, 2018; Hamill et al., 2015). The primary functions are to contract and produce movement, support the skeletal system, and assist with homeostasis of the body by producing heat. The anatomy of a muscle can be further broken down into layers from the outer surface to the innermost layer (**Figure 5-37**) (Frontera & Ochala, 2015).

**Figure 5-37Structures of skeletal muscle

The first layer is connective tissue called fascia. **Fascia** surrounds skeletal muscles and connects them to other surrounding muscles. The layer of fascia that directly surrounds an entire muscle is called the **epimysium**, which is also commonly referred to as the “deep fascia” (Frontera & Ochala, 2015). Within the muscle, the largest bundles of fibers are called **fascicles**. Similar to how epimysium wraps and contains the whole muscle, each fascicle is individually wrapped by connective tissue called **perimysium**. Each fascicle is made up of many individual muscle fibers that are bundled together by connective tissue called **endomysium** (Frontera & Ochala, 2015).

Connective tissues within the muscle play a vital role in movement. They allow the forces generated by the muscle to be transmitted from the contractile components of the muscle to the bones, creating motion. Connective tissue is what also allows muscles to work together as functional groups, such as the four quadricep muscles working together to extend the knee. Each layer of connective tissue extends the length of the muscle, coming together at the ends to help form the tendon and attach to bones (Krause et al., 2016).

## Key Terms

**Skeletal muscle**
The type of muscle tissue that connects to bones and generates the forces that create movement.

**Fascia**
Connective tissue that surrounds muscles and bones.

**Epimysium**
Inner layer of fascia that directly surrounds an entire muscle, commonly referred to as the “deep fascia.”

**Fascicles**
Largest bundles of fibers within a muscle. Fascicles are surrounded by perimysium.

**Perimysium**
Connective tissue surrounding a muscle fascicle.

**Endomysium**
Connective tissue that wraps around individual muscle fibers within a fascicle.

## Images

**Figure 5-37: Structures of skeletal muscle**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF37.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533