---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Collectively, the merging of many neurons together forms the nerves of the body. Neurons are composed of three main parts: cell body, axon, and dendrites. Like all cells, the cell body of a neuron contains a **nucleus** and other **organelles**, such as **mitochondria**. The axon is a cylindrical projection from the cell body that transmits nervous impulses to other neurons or **effector sites** (muscles and organs). The axon is the part of the neuron that provides communication from the brain and spinal cord to other parts of the body. The dendrites gather information from other structures and transmit it back into the neuron (Wehrwein et al., 2016).

The nervous system requires different **electrolytes** or minerals that have an electrical charge to help transmit nerve impulses throughout the body. The four primary electrolytes involved in this process are sodium, potassium, magnesium, and water. Adequate levels of electrolytes must be maintained to produce proper nerve function (Kenney et al., 2020).

### HELPFUL HINT

Neurons are composed of three main parts:

	- The cell body, which contains the nucleus and organelles

	- The axon, which is a cylindrical projection extending from the cell body that carries nerve messages

	- Dendrites, which are structures that receive messages from other neurons

## Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems

The nervous system is composed of two interdependent divisions: the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. The **central nervous system (CNS)** consists of the brain and the spinal cord, and its primary function is to coordinate the activity of all parts of the body (**Figure 5-2**) (Ludwig & Varacallo, 2019). The **peripheral nervous system (PNS)** consists of nerves that connect the CNS to the rest of the body and the external environment. The nerves of the PNS are how the CNS receives sensory input, integrates the information, and then sends a response to the rest of the body (Ludwig & Varacallo, 2019).

The peripheral nervous system consists of 12 cranial nerves, 31 pairs of spinal nerves that branch out from the brain and spinal cord, and sensory receptors (**Figure 5-3**) (Kenney et al., 2020). These peripheral nerves serve two main functions. First, they provide sensory information (e.g., sight, smell, touch, taste) from the rest of the body up to the CNS via the **afferent pathway** (i.e., the sensory pathway).

## Key Terms

**Nucleus**
Cellular structure or organelle that contains the majority of the cell’s genetic material in the form of chromosomes.

**Organelles**
Tiny cellular structures that perform specific functions within a cell. Examples include nuclei, mitochondria, lysosomes, ribosomes, and the endoplasmic reticulum.

**Mitochondria**
The parts of the cell that use nutrients to create energy for the cell; commonly known as the powerhouses of the cell.

**Effector sites**
A part of the body, such as a muscle or organ, that receives a signal from a neuron to produce a physiological response.

**Electrolytes**
Minerals that have an electrical charge to help transmit nerve impulses throughout the body, such as sodium, potassium, and magnesium.

**Central nervous system (CNS)**
A division of the nervous system that includes the brain and spinal cord.

**Peripheral nervous system (PNS)**
Nerves that connect the rest of the body to the central nervous system.

**Afferent pathway**
Sensory pathway that relays information to the central nervous system.

## Images

**Figure 5-2: Central nervous system**
Alt: peripheral nervous system
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-3: Peripheral nervous system**
Alt: peripheral nervous system
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533