---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Second, the peripheral nerves relay information from the CNS back down to the rest of the body via the **efferent pathway** (i.e., the motor pathway). **Interneurons** are only located within the spinal cord and the brain. They transmit impulses between the afferent and efferent neurons (Kenney et al., 2020).

Sensory receptors are specialized structures located throughout the body that convert environmental stimuli (heat, light, sound, taste, motion) into sensory information that the brain and spinal cord use to produce a response. Sensory receptors use the afferent pathway to send information to the CNS. These sensory receptors are subdivided into mechanoreceptors, nociceptors, chemoreceptors, and photoreceptors (Wade, 2019).

**Mechanoreceptors** respond to mechanical forces (touch and pressure), nociceptors respond to pain (pain receptors), chemoreceptors respond to chemical interaction (smell and taste), and photoreceptors respond to light (vision) (Ackerley & Watkins, 2018). Mechanoreceptors arguably relate most to the science of human movement, making them the most important for fitness professionals to understand.

## Key Terms

**Efferent pathway**
A motor pathway that relays information from the central nervous system to the rest of the body.

**Interneurons**
Neurons located within the spinal cord and brain that transmit impulses between afferent and efferent neurons.

**Mechanoreceptors**
Specialized structures that respond to mechanical forces (touch and pressure) within tissues and then transmit signals through sensory nerves.