---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Clients who take daily aspirin or medications that are classified as blood thinners or anticoagulants may not have the same clotting ability as other clients. These clients are more likely to bruise from certain interventions, such as foam rolling or massage.

Additionally, blood transports nutrients from the gastrointestinal tract to various organs and tissues throughout the body (Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Vander et al., 2003). Last but not least, blood stores and transports cells that help the body heal when injured, such as stem cells (Villaron et al., 2004).

### REGULATION

Blood helps regulate body temperature by transferring heat to and from the internal core and the periphery of the body as it circulates. As blood travels close to the skin, it can be either heated or cooled depending on the external environment (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). If the external environment is colder than circulating blood, body heat will be lost, and vice versa.

Blood is also essential in regulating pH levels (acid balance) in the body as well as maintaining the water content of body cells (Tortora, 2008). With regard to pH levels, blood is only one of the many buffering systems used by the body to maintain a normal range. Other systems that help manage the body’s pH levels include the respiratory and renal (kidney/ urinary) systems.

### PROTECTION

Blood provides protection from excessive blood loss through its clotting mechanism (e.g., platelets), which seals off damaged tissue and forms a scar (Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Vander et al., 2003). It also provides specialized immune cells to fight against foreign toxins within the body, which help reduce the risk of disease and illness (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Vander et al., 2003).