---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Heart sounds heard through a stethoscope during a medical cardiac assessment reflect the functioning of the valves. Abnormal sounds may be referred to as a heart murmur (Reid et al., 2014).

## Blood

**Blood** is a unique life-sustaining fluid that supplies the body’s organs and cells with oxygen and nutrients and helps regulate body temperature, fight infections, and remove waste products (Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Vander et al., 2003). Blood consists of cells suspended in a watery liquid called plasma, which also contains nutrients such as glucose (sugar), lipids (fat), proteins, hormones, clotting agents, and other vital molecules.

There are three kinds of cells in the blood: red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Red blood cells carry oxygen from the lungs throughout the body, white blood cells help fight infections, and platelets help with clotting. Platelets also contain numerous **growth factors**, which may be responsible for healing after an injury.

Plasma makes up about 55% of the total volume of the blood, and the remaining 45% is made up of cellular material (e.g., red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets). The average adult holds between 4 and 6 liters of blood in his or her body (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Vander et al., 2003). Blood is a vital support mechanism, which provides an internal transportation, regulation, and protection system for the human body (**Table 6-1**).

**TABLE 6-1 Support Mechanisms of Blood**

| Mechanism | Function |
|---|---|
| Transportation | Transports oxygen and nutrients to tissues |
| Transports waste products from tissues |
| Transports hormones, growth factors, and stem cells to organs and tissues |
| Carries heat throughout the body |
| Regulation | Regulates body temperature and acid balance in the body |
| Protection | Protects the body from excessive bleeding by clotting |
| Contains specialized immune cells to help fight disease and sickness |

### TRANSPORTATION

Blood transports life-sustaining oxygen to all bodily tissues and transports waste products to other regions of the body (Fox, 2006; Hicks, 2000; Vander et al., 2003). Blood also stores, protects, and transports hormones to parts of the body where they exert their effects.

## Key Terms

**Blood**
Fluid that circulates in the heart, arteries, capillaries, and veins; it carries nutrients and oxygen to all parts of the body and also transports waste products from the body to other compartments or organs for either processing (e.g., liver) or excretion (e.g., kidney).

**Growth factors**
Substances within the blood that attach to cells, aid in growth and development, and help with healing after injury

**Stem cells**
Cells within the body that divide and develop into specialized cells, such as brain cells, blood cells, heart cells, and bone cells.