---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Anatomical images are typically displayed as if the reader is looking at another person from the front, not as if the reader is looking into a mirror. For that reason, remember that the right side of an anatomy image, as it is viewed in a book or on the screen, actually represents the left side of a person’s body.

The atria are smaller chambers, located superiorly (on top) on either side of the heart. They gather blood returning to the heart and act much like a reservoir. The right atrium gathers deoxygenated blood returning to the heart from the body, whereas the left atrium gathers oxygenated blood coming to the heart from the lungs.

The ventricles are larger chambers located inferiorly (on the bottom) on either side of the heart. The right ventricle receives the deoxygenated blood from the right atrium and then pumps it to the lungs through the pulmonary artery to be saturated with incoming oxygen. The right ventricle has thin walls and pumps under low pressure because it only needs to pump blood a short distance to the lungs.

Once the lungs oxygenate the blood, it passes through the pulmonary vein to the left atrium. The left ventricle receives the oxygenated blood from the left atrium and proceeds to pump it through the entire body. The left ventricle has thicker walls and pumps under high pressure because it pumps blood a greater distance, out to the rest of the body. Each chamber of the heart is separated from one another via one-way valves to prevent a backflow or spillage of blood back into the chambers. **Figure 6-4** illustrates how deoxygenated and oxygenated blood flows through the heart.

**Figure 6-4The path of blood through the heart

## Images

**Figure 6-4: The path of blood through the heart**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533