---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: The Digestive System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Absorption of carbohydrates, lipids (fats), calcium, amino acids (protein), and iron occur primarily in the duodenum and jejunum (Pandol et al., 2015; Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019). Absorption of salts, vitamins, water, and electrolytes (e.g., sodium, potassium, magnesium) occurs in the ileum. In addition to absorption, many digestive enzymes are present in the small intestine. These enzymes are necessary for absorption. The pancreas, liver, and gall bladder have ducts that allow the passage of their digestive juices into the duodenum region.

Similar to the stomach and gall bladder, intestinal contractions move food through the tracts into the large intestine. Once at this stage, the macronutrients (fat, carbohydrates, and proteins) have been converted through digestion into forms that can be absorbed into the bloodstream for bodily use (Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019).

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

The nervous system in the GI tract is known as the enteric nervous system. Within this system, there are as many nerves in the small intestine as the entire spinal cord (Goodman & Fuller, 2015). Although intestinal contractions are automatic and stimulated by food, the nervous system plays a large role in the excitability of the smooth muscles of the intestines. What is most interesting is that the enteric nervous system can work on its own without any assistance from the brain and spinal cord (Goodman & Fuller, 2015).

### LOWER GI TRACT

The large intestine (i.e., the colon) serves in part to absorb electrolytes including water, and certain vitamins (Pandol et al., 2015). The large intestine resides between the small intestine and the rectum and anal canal, where waste product is passed out of the body (**Figure 6-17**). From an anatomical perspective, the first area of the large intestine that receives food is the cecum (Pandol et al., 2015). The cecum receives the chyme, which is then passed in order through the ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, rectum, and anus (Pandol et al., 2015). It is important to note that the large intestine has little to no digestive function and serves primarily to absorb and pass waste into the rectum.

## Images

**Figure 6-17: The lower GI tract**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF17.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533