---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The left and right lungs lie on each side of the heart (Swain, 2014). The heart is contained in the area of the chest known as the **mediastinum** (Tortora, 2008), is approximately the size of a typical adult fist, and weighs roughly 300 grams or approximately 10 ounces (Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008).

**Cardiac muscle** is one of three major types of muscle found in the human body; the other types are **skeletal muscle** and **smooth muscle**. Cardiac muscle is similar to skeletal muscle in that cardiac muscle cells contain **myofibrils** and **sarcomeres** aligned side by side, which give them their striated appearance (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Vander et al., 2003). However, while skeletal muscle is voluntary muscle, cardiac muscle is involuntary muscle, which typically cannot be consciously controlled.

### STRUCTURE OF THE HEART

The heart is composed of four hollow chambers that are delineated into two interdependent (but separate) pumps on either side. Each side of the heart has two chambers: an **atrium** and a **ventricle** (Fox, 2006; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). The right side of the heart is referred to as the pulmonic side (*pulmonary* means “related to the lungs”) because it receives blood from the body that is low in oxygen and high in carbon dioxide—often referred to as deoxygenated blood. The deoxygenated blood is then pumped to the lungs to be saturated with oxygen.

The left side of the heart is referred to as the systemic side because it has received oxygenated blood from the lungs that is high in oxygen and low in carbon dioxide, which it then pumps out to the rest of the body. **Figure 6-3** illustrates both sides of the heart, with the blue side representing the pulmonary side and the red side representing the systemic side.

## Key Terms

**Mediastinum**
The space in the chest between the lungs that contains all the internal organs of the chest (e.g., heart, esophagus) except the lungs.

**Cardiac muscle**
Muscle of the heart.

**Skeletal muscle**
The type of muscle tissue that connects to bones and generates the forces that create movement.

**Smooth muscle**
An involuntary nonstriated muscle type that is found in organs.

**Myofibrils**
The contractile components of a muscle cell; the myofilaments (actin and myosin) are contained within a myofibril.

**Sarcomere**
The structural unit of a myofibril, composed of actin and myosin filaments between two Z-lines.

**Atrium (atria)**
Superior chamber(s) of the heart that gathers blood returning to the heart.

**Ventricle**
Inferior chamber of the heart that pumps blood to the lungs and body.

## Images

**Figure 6-3: Pulmonary and systemic sides of the heart**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533