---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: The Endocrine System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Insulin, Glucagon, and the Control of Blood Glucose

Carbohydrates, specifically glucose (sugar), make up the primary energy source during vigorous exercise. Carbohydrates are one of the human body’s key sources of energy, and glucose is the principal fuel for the brain. Any extreme fluctuations in blood glucose levels can be dangerous; while too little can inhibit performance, too much can also damage the vascular system. Control of blood glucose is regulated in large part by two hormones, **insulin** and **glucagon**, which are controlled and secreted by the pancreas.

### INSULIN

Insulin helps regulate metabolism in the body, primarily by telling the body which **substrates** (e.g., fat or carbohydrates) to use for fuel and whether the body is in a fed or fasted state. After consuming a meal, glucose enters the blood at the small intestine, causing a rise in blood glucose levels. The rise of glucose triggers the pancreas to release insulin into the bloodstream. Insulin binds to receptors on the surface of muscle, liver, and fat cells, facilitating the uptake of glucose from the bloodstream into these cells. In muscle and liver cells, glucose is converted into **glycogen**, the storage form of glucose. The net result is a drop of blood glucose levels (**Figure 6-12**). Thus, insulin causes cells in the liver, muscle, and fat tissue to take up glucose from the blood (McArdle et al., 2016).

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

The hormone insulin and the condition of diabetes are closely related. In type 1 diabetes, the pancreas is not able to produce sufficient insulin, whereas in type 2 adult onset diabetes, the cells become resistant to insulin. Insulin resistance increases blood sugar content, which can be harmful to the body.

#### HELPFUL HINT

Insulin functions like a train heading to specific destinations. Glucose molecules are the passengers on the train, and the bloodstream functions as the railroad tracks. Without the train (insulin) and the railroad tracks (bloodstream), the passengers (glucose) could not reach their destinations (liver, muscle, and fat cells).

**Figure 6-12 Insulin response to elevated blood sugar

### GLUCAGON

Glucagon is one of the two hormones secreted by the pancreas that regulates blood glucose levels and is often considered as the counterpart to insulin. Glucagon primarily works to raise blood glucose levels by triggering the release of glycogen stores from the liver (**Figure 6-13**) (Qaid & Abderlrahman, 2016).

**Figure 6-13Glucagon response to low blood sugar

## Key Terms

**Insulin**
A hormone secreted by the pancreas that is responsible for glucose metabolism.

**Glucagon**
A hormone secreted by the pancreas that regulates blood glucose and functions opposite to insulin.

**Substrates**
Intermediate forms of nutrients used in metabolic reactions to create adenosine triphosphate.

**Glycogen**
Glucose that is deposited and stored in bodily tissues, such as the liver and muscle cells; the storage form of carbohydrate.

## Images

**Figure 6-12: Insulin response to elevated blood sugar**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF12.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 6-13: Glucagon response to low blood sugar**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF13.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533