---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### HELPFUL HINT

To help remember the positioning of the heart’s chambers and the path of blood flow through them, remember the following phrases:

	- “**A** comes before **V** in the alphabet”—This signifies that blood will first flow into the **A**tria on top, then down to the Ventricles to be pumped out to either the lungs or body.

	- “Right returns and left leaves”—This signifies that the **right**-side chambers collect **returning** deoxygenated blood from the body (right atrium) and send it to the lungs (right ventricle), while the **left**-side chambers collect oxygenated blood that has **left** the lungs (left atrium) and send it out to the body (left ventricle).

### CARDIAC MUSCLE CONTRACTION

Cardiac muscle fibers are shorter and more tightly connected than skeletal muscle. Another unique feature of cardiac muscle is the presence of irregularly spaced dark bands between cardiac cells called intercalated discs. **Intercalated discs** help hold cardiac muscle cells together during contraction and create an electrical connection between the cells, which allows the heart to contract as one functional unit.

The heart has its own built-in conduction system that rapidly sends an electrical signal throughout all the cardiac cells (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; McArdle et al., 2016; Vander et al., 2003). A **resting heart rate (RHR)**, also known as a pulse, means the number of times the heart contracts per minute while at rest. Resting heart rate ranges can vary dramatically depending on the age, size, gender, health status, and fitness level of the individual.

## Key Terms

**Intercalated discs**
Found in the heart, these formations help hold together muscle cells.

**Resting heart rate (RHR)**
The number of heart beats per minute while at complete rest.