---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Muscle Actions
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
##### TRAINING TIP

Eccentric muscle actions are able to resist more weight than concentric actions. Therefore, to optimally load muscles during the eccentric phase, resistance implements (dumbbells, barbells, and so on) can be lowered more slowly than they are lifted to increase the time under tension for better strength improvements (Franchi et al., 2017; Goto et al., 2009; Kraemer & Ratamess, 2005). In other words, lifting a heavy weight likely requires a faster tempo than lowering that same weight.

#### CONCENTRIC

A **concentric muscle action** occurs when the contractile force (i.e., the force developed within the muscle) is greater than the resistive force, resulting in a visible shortening of the muscle. As the muscle shortens, the actin and myosin cross-bridges move together (i.e., sliding-filament theory), allowing the muscle to shorten (see Chapter 5 for more details regarding the sliding-filament theory) (McArdle et al., 2016).

A concentric muscle action is synonymous with acceleration and can be observed in many movements, such as jumping upward and the “lifting” phase during a resistance training exercise. During a concentric muscle contraction, “positive work” is being done by the muscle as the joint moves through a ROM to move a load against the pull of gravity. Concentric muscle actions expend the highest amount of energy when compared to isometric and eccentric muscle actions (Levangie et al., 2019).

### ISOMETRIC

An **isometric muscle action** occurs when the contractile force is equal to the resistive force, leading to no visible change in the muscle length (Kisner & Colby, 2007). For example, performing a plank exercise requires an isometric contraction of the muscles of the lumbo-pelvic-hip complex (LPHC), also known as the **core**. In this example, the muscles of the core are all activating but no visible motion of the body is occurring. An isometric contraction can also be observed when an individual pauses during a resistance training exercise in between the lifting and lowering phases.

Any time the body is in motion, numerous muscles take turns creating isometric actions to dynamically stabilize the peripheral joints and spine. For example, during squat movements, abductor and adductor muscles of the hip contract isometrically to prevent unnecessary movement (instability) in the frontal and transverse planes, while the gluteals, quadriceps, and hamstrings work concentrically and eccentrically in the sagittal plane (Kolber et al., 2017).

##### TRAINING TIP

A body of evidence has shown that exercises comprised of only eccentric muscle actions will, when appropriately loaded, stimulate anabolic hormones to a greater degree than exercises comprised of only concentric muscle actions (Franchi et al., 2017; Kraemer & Ratamess, 2005). As such, fitness professionals should not neglect the eccentric portion of a resistance training exercise.

## Key Terms

**Concentric muscle action**
A muscle action that occurs when a muscle is exerting force greater than the resistive force, resulting in a shortening of the muscle.

**Isometric muscle action**
When a muscle is exerting force equal to the force being placed on it leading to no visible change in the muscle length.

**Core**
The structures that make up the lumbo-pelvic-hip complex (LPHC), including the lumbar spine, pelvic girdle, abdomen, and hip joint.