---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Summary

The human movement system is a highly complex set of systems and subsystems designed to enable individuals to move throughout their daily lives. During normal human movement, the body requires a vast network of integrated functioning of the muscular, skeletal, and neurological systems. Learning new movements requires the cooperative function of these systems, appropriate feedback mechanisms, and the ability to identify abnormal movement patterns. Correcting, developing, and advancing movement patterns require an understanding of feedback mechanisms as well as a working knowledge of biomechanical principles used to augment traditional exercises.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

The study of biomechanics looks at how internal and external forces affect the way the body moves. To understand the body and communicate about it effectively, a fitness professional must be familiar with the terminology for the various anatomic locations. It is also important to know how the body moves in the sagittal, frontal, and transverse planes as well as the joint motions in each of these planes. Further to this point, exercises and movement may be described based on muscle function with respect to the agonist, stabilizers, antagonists, and force-couples. While the initial understanding of human movement is based on recognizing the attributes of simple movements, higher-level understanding requires an awareness of the local and global systems as well as the global subsystems, which provide insight into the cooperative function of the muscular system when carrying out movement and transferring forces.

There are three types of muscle movements: eccentric, isometric, or concentric. Each muscle should be studied at length to examine its functions as well as how it moves synergistically with others. In addition, an isokinetic muscle action occurs at a constant speed, requiring expensive and sophisticated equipment. In addition to describing an exercise or movement based on the type of muscle movements or contractions, the environment of the exercise, such as open- or closed-chain, will provide insight into key characteristics. Closed-chain exercises are more likely to recruit multiple muscle groups and joints, whereas open-chain movements are more likely to isolate a particular joint or muscle.