---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Muscular Systems of the Body

Not only do muscles work together in force-couple relationships around the joints but they also work together throughout the body forming a network of interworking systems that work to both stabilize and create movement in all three planes of motion. There are two overarching categories of these systems, known as the local and global muscular systems.

### LOCAL MUSCULAR SYSTEM

Local muscles generally attach on or near the vertebrae and serve the primary purpose of stabilizing the trunk of the body. The local muscular system is composed of the *inner unit* of the core and includes the rotatores, multifidus, transversus abdominis, diaphragm, pelvic floor, and quadratus lumborum. Many of these muscles can be actively contracted and may also activate automatically in anticipation of limb or trunk movements, a neurological process known as the feed-forward activation (Masse-Alarie et al., 2012; Okubo et al., 2010). The local muscular system is thought to offer a segmental stabilization effect on the spine (Okubo et al., 2010). Due to this, some commonly refer to it simply as the stabilization system of the core.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Evidence has shown that the feed-forward stabilization effect from the transversus abdominis and internal oblique musculature is delayed among people with lower back pain (Masse-Alarie et al., 2012). These intrinsic, core stabilizer muscles are often underactive in individuals with overactive hip flexors, causing an anterior tilting of the pelvis and low-back arch.

It should be noted, however, that there are also stabilization force-couples working together systematically in other regions of the body, known as **joint support systems**. For example, the rotator cuff of the shoulder is a group of muscles functioning in a similar manner to provide stabilization support for the glenohumeral (shoulder) joint (Day et al., 2012).

### GLOBAL MUSCULAR SYSTEM

The global muscular system is comprised of larger muscles that initiate movements and tend to function across one or more joints (Okubo et al., 2010). These muscles are generally larger and act as prime movers during many functional tasks, such as pushing, pulling, squatting, and walking. Because of this, the global muscular system is commonly referred to as the movement system. Examples of global muscles include the rectus abdominis, erector spinae, and latissimus dorsi.

The global muscular system’s main interconnected function is to transfer forces through the LPHC to create the most efficient movement possible while also providing additional support to protect the trunk and spine as the body moves. To better illustrate how muscles of the movement system work together in synchrony, the global muscles can be categorized into subsystems, which include the deep longitudinal, posterior oblique, anterior oblique, and lateral subsystems. These muscular subsystems highlight the functional elements of regional interdependence, as well as the necessary extensions of force-couple relationships. Without these subsystems, normal movement would be impaired, and the risk of injury and reduced performance would increase. Each of the subsystems is mirrored on the left and right sides of the body.

## Key Terms

**Joint support systems**
Muscular stabilization systems located in joints distal of the spine.