---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Motor Behavior
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### SENSORIMOTOR INTEGRATION

**Sensorimotor integration** is the ability of the nervous system to gather and interpret sensory information and to select and execute the proper motor response (Biedert, 2000; Drury, 2000; Janda & Va Vrova, 1996; Levangie et al., 2019; Rose, 1997). The definition implies that the nervous system ultimately dictates movement. It is important to recognize that nervous system function includes both central and peripheral nervous systems as well as their integration with the musculotendinous structures and inert tissues (ligament and capsule).

For example, during an exercise, the muscle is activated and movement occurs. Movement occurs as a result of neural input to the muscle from the nervous system. Further to this point, the movement that occurs may activate the muscle receptors as well as the receptors in the joint itself, both providing feedback to the nervous system and influencing movement.

Sensorimotor integration is effective as long as the quality of incoming sensory information is good (Janda & Va Vrova, 1996; Levangie et al., 2019). Individuals who train using improper form will develop improper sensory information delivered to the central nervous system, leading to movement compensations and potential injury. It is, therefore, important to create properly designed exercise programs and encourage clients to train with correct techniques at all times. For example, if an individual consistently performs a chest press while rounding and elevating the shoulders, it can lead to altered length-tension relationships of muscles, altered force-couple relationships, and altered arthrokinematics, ultimately leading to shoulder injury.

## Motor Learning

Motor learning is the integration of motor control processes, with practice and experience, leading to a relatively permanent change in the capacity to produce skilled movements (Levangie et al., 2019; Rose, 1997; Schmidt & Lee, 1999). The study of motor learning looks at how movements are learned and retained for future use. Motor learning occurs when practicing to ride a bike, throw a baseball, play the piano, and every other physical task the body can possibly learn to perform.

In all cases, proper practice and experience will lead to a permanent change in one’s ability to perform a movement efficiently. For a movement to occur repeatedly, sensory information and sensorimotor integration must be used to aid the HMS in the development of permanent neural representations of motor patterns, a process referred to as feedback. Essentially, the nervous system learns from repeated activity, and newer movements often take more time to be refined or mastered.

### FEEDBACK

**Feedback** is the use of sensory information and sensorimotor integration to aid the HMS in developing permanent neural representations of motor patterns. Feedback allows for efficient movement, which is achieved through two different forms of feedback: internal (or sensory) feedback and external (or augmented) feedback.

#### INTERNAL FEEDBACK

**Internal feedback** is the process whereby the body uses sensory information to reactively monitor movement and the environment. It comes primarily from internal biological structures (mechanoreceptors) in the body relaying information via the autonomic nervous system. Internal feedback acts as a guide, steering the HMS to the proper force, speed, and amplitude of movement patterns for a given situation.

It is important to instruct clients to use proper form when exercising to ensure that the incoming sensory feedback is correct information, allowing for optimal sensorimotor integration. For example, during a hamstring stretch, the exerciser can feel when a stretch has reached a tolerable limit and chooses to stop further movement to avoid overstretching.

## Key Terms

**Sensorimotor integration**
Cooperation of the nervous and muscular system in gathering and interpreting information and executing movement.

**Feedback**
Use of sensory information and sensorimotor integration to help the human movement system in motor learning.

**Internal feedback**
Process whereby sensory information is used by the body to reactively monitor movement and the environment.