---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Motor Behavior
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### EXTERNAL FEEDBACK

**External feedback** refers to the information provided by an external source, including a Certified Personal Trainer, video recording, mirror, or heart rate monitor, to help supplement internal feedback to produce more efficient motor learning. External feedback provides clients with another source of information that allows them to associate whether the achieved movement pattern was “good” or “bad” with what they are feeling internally.

Two major forms of external feedback are knowledge of results and knowledge of performance (Rose, 1997; Schmidt & Lee, 1999; Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2000; Swinnen, 1996). *Knowledge of results* is used after the completion of a movement to help inform a client about the outcome of the performance. Effective use and application of knowledge of results involves both the fitness professional and the client’s participation. An example of knowledge of results is a fitness professional telling clients that their squats looked “good” followed by asking the clients whether they could “feel” or “see” their good form.

By getting clients involved with the knowledge of results, they increase their awareness and augment other forms of sensory feedback, leading to more effective exercise technique. Knowledge of results can be done after each repetition, after a few repetitions, or after the set is completed. As clients become increasingly familiar with the desired technique of a movement, knowledge of results from the fitness professional can be offered less frequently. When knowledge of results is implemented, it improves **neuromuscular efficiency** as well (Swinnen, 1996). 

*Knowledge of performance* provides information about the quality of the movement during an exercise. An example would be noticing that a client’s feet were excessively externally rotated

and the knees were adducting during a squat, and then asking the client whether they felt or looked different during those repetitions. Knowledge of performance gets the client involved in their own sensory process. Knowledge of performance should be offered less frequently as the client becomes more proficient (Swinnen, 1996).

These forms of external feedback allow for the identification of performance errors and help improve effective performance outcomes in the future. They are also an important component of motivation. Furthermore, they provide the client supplemental sensory input to help create an awareness of the desired action. It is important that clients not become dependent on external feedback, especially from a fitness professional, because this may detract from their responsiveness to internal sensory input or internal motivation (Rose, 1997; Schmidt & Lee, 1999; Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2000; Swinnen, 1996). Excessive use of external feedback can negatively affect sensorimotor integration and motor learning and, ultimately, movement patterns.

## Key Terms

**External feedback**
Information provided by some external source, such as a fitness professional, video, mirror, or heart rate monitor, to supplement the internal environment.

**Neuromuscular efficiency**
The ability of the nervous system to recruit the correct muscles to produce force, reduce force, and dynamically stabilize the body’s structure in all three planes of motion.