---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Because we cannot alter the attachment sites or the line of pull of our muscles through the tendon, the easiest way to alter the amount of torque generated at a joint is to move the resistance. In other words, the closer the weight is to the point of rotation, the less torque it creates (**Figure 7-24**). The farther away the weight is from the point of rotation, the more torque it creates. From a biomechanical perspective, the distance a weight is from the joint it is acting on directly determines the effort required of a muscle to move the weight (Levangie et al., 2019). Meaning, the farther the distance, the harder the muscle must work, thus, the greater activation of the muscle.

For example, when holding a dumbbell straight out to the side at arm’s length (shoulder abduction), the weight may be approximately 24 inches from the center of the shoulder joint. The prime mover for shoulder abduction is the deltoid muscle. If its attachment is approximately 2 inches from the joint center, there is a difference of 22 inches (11 times greater). However, if the weight is moved closer to the joint center, to the elbow, the resistance is only approximately 12 inches from the joint center. Now the difference is only 10 inches or 5 times greater. Essentially, the weight was reduced by half.

Many people performing side lateral raises with dumbbells do this inadvertently by bending their elbow and bringing the weight closer to the shoulder joint. Fitness professionals can use this principle as a regression to exercises that are too demanding by reducing the torque placed on the HMS or as a progression to increase the torque and place a greater demand on the HMS.

# TRY THIS

Lie on your side with a weight wrapped around the ankle joint of your top leg and abduct your thigh. Now, repeat with the weight wrapped around your knee. Notice how much easier it was to abduct the hip when moving the resistance closer to the center of the moving joint (hip). That is because moving the weight closer to the joint reduces the amount of torque required.

## Images

**Figure 7-24: Load and torque relationship**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF24.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533