---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Force-Couple Relationships

Muscles produce a force that is transmitted to bones through their connective tissues, known as **tendons**. Because muscles are recruited as groups, many muscles will transmit force onto their respective bones, creating movement at the joints. This synergistic action of multiple muscles to produce movement around a joint is known as a **force-couple relationship **(Levangie et al., 2019).

Muscles in a force-couple provide divergent pulls on the bone or bones they connect with. That is to say, each muscle has different attachment sites, pulls at a different angle, and creates a different force on that joint. The motion that results from the combination of differing forces is dependent on the structure of the joint and the collective pull of each muscle involved (Levangie et al., 2019). For example, the middle trapezius, lower trapezius, and serratus anterior all pull on the scapula (shoulder blade) in different directions to assist with shoulder abduction (**Figure 7-18**).

### CRITICAL

Muscles are connected to bones via tendons. When a muscle contracts, the muscle’s tendon pulls on its respective bone(s) to create joint motion. Muscles can only pull on their respective bones—muscles cannot actively push.

In reality, however, every movement produced must involve all muscle actions (eccentric, isometric, concentric) and all functions (agonists, synergists, stabilizers, and antagonists) to ensure proper joint motion as well as to eliminate unwanted or unnecessary motion. Thus, all muscles working in unison to produce a desired movement are said to be working in a force-couple relationship (Levangie et al., 2019).

To ensure that the HMS moves properly, it must have proper force-couple relationships around its joints, which can only happen if the muscles are at the right length-tension relationships and the joints have proper arthrokinematics. Collectively, proper length-tension relationships in the muscles allow for proper posture and motion at the joints, which in turn allow for optimal force-couple relationships that produce the most efficient movement (Levangie et al., 2019).

## Key Terms

**Tendon**
A fibrous connective tissue that connects muscle to bone.

**Force-couple relationship**
The synergistic action of multiple muscles working together to produce movement around a joint.

## Images

**Figure 7-18: Force-couple relationship example—shoulder abduction**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF18.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533