---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
When the muscles of the POS contract, they produce a pulling force across the thoracolumbar fascia and a stabilization force at the sacroiliac joint. When mirrored for both the left and right sides of the body, the POS can be seen to form an X across the sacroiliac joint, creating the divergent tensions that lead to its stabilization effect.

This system works together with the DLS during gait just prior to or during heel strike as the gluteus maximus and latissimus dorsi are eccentrically loaded (Levangie et al., 2019). The force-couple relationship of the gluteus maximus and latissimus dorsi are highlighted here, which together provide a functional element of stability to the LPHC as a whole. Further to this point, the regional interdependence of the LPHC, middle, and upper back is highlighted by the interaction of the POS musculature.

#### ANTERIOR OBLIQUE SUBSYSTEM

The anterior oblique subsystem (AOS) is similar to the POS, just on the anterior side of the body. The muscles include the obliques, the adductor (inner) thigh muscles, and the hip external rotators. The obliques and contralateral (opposite) adductors are the most common visualization of this subsystem because of the X pattern made across the front of the body (**Figure 7-21**). The AOS creates stability from the trunk, through the pelvis, and to the hips and contributes to rotational movement. The AOS and POS work together as a global force-couple in enabling rotational force production in the transverse plane.

##### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

During normal walking and running, the pelvis rotates in the transverse plane to facilitate the necessary momentum for the swing phase of gait where leg and thigh are advanced forward in the sagittal plane.

## Images

**Figure 7-21: Anterior oblique subsystem**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF21.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533