---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
As the intensity of an activity increases, the body transitions from using mostly fat as fuel to using mostly glucose to provide energy. This is because glucose can be used much faster than fat and can also be metabolized without oxygen, whereas using fat for fuel always requires oxygen.

As activity intensity increases, the usage of carbohydrate as an energy source becomes 50%, and the usage of fat becomes 50%. This metabolic marker is referred to as **ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1)**. This will be an important concept to keep in mind during cardiorespiratory assessment and programming, especially as it pertains to maximizing both fat loss goals and performance goals for clients. As exercise intensity increases further to maximal levels, **ventilatory threshold 2 (VT2)** is reached (Ballweg et al., 2013; Foster et al., 2008). VT2 represents the point where activity is so intense that glucose is providing virtually all of the energy for the activity, as fats metabolize too slowly to keep up with maximal demands. If the supplies of glucose and glycogen run out, a person would not be able to continue exercising at maximal intensity and he or she will have to reduce effort to a point where fat usage is once again possible, commonly referred to as hitting a wall. This is part of why some athletes use “energy gels” and other carbohydrate supplements during prolonged strenuous training and in competition.

### FREE FATTY ACIDS

An equally important source of energy are **fats**, also known as lipids. This energy source is particularly important during rest and lower-intensity activity (i.e., below VT1). The chemical (or substrate) form in which most fats exist in food (as well as in the body) is called **triglyceride** (Gleeson, 2005; Kalish et al., 2012). Triglycerides, more commonly referred to as **free fatty acids** when they are in the blood stream, are derived directly from fats contained in foods or are made by the body to store excess energy when more food is consumed than is needed to support activity.

Before cells can use consumed fat or stored body fat as a fuel source, it first needs to be broken down into free fatty acids. Free fatty acids are then used exclusively in the aerobic metabolic pathway to produce ATP. One of the benefits of having fat as a fuel source is that even relatively lean people still have a large supply stored on their body, which can be broken down into triglycerides and used for energy during prolonged, lower-intensity physical activity and exercise. Any time an individual is exercising at an intensity below VT1, free fatty acids are the primary fuel source.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

For conversion purposes, 1 lb (~0.5 kg) of body fat equals around 3,500 calories of stored energy. For example, a lean 150 lb (~68 kg) person with 10% body fat would still have roughly 15 lb (~6.8 kg) of fat stored away throughout their body. That is roughly 52,500 calories!

### AMINO ACIDS

The third fuel source is **protein**, which is made up of long chains of “building block” substances called amino acids. Humans use 20 different amino acids to assemble bodily proteins. Of these 20 amino acids, nine are called **essential amino acids**, which means that the body cannot synthesize them on its own and they must be consumed in the diet.

## Key Terms

**Ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1)**
The point at which the body uses an equal mix of carbohydrate and fat as fuel sources.

**Ventilatory threshold 2 (VT2)**
The point where glucose provides nearly all of the energy for the activity.

**Fats**
One of the three main classes of foods and a source of energy in the body. Fats help the body use some vitamins and keep the skin healthy. They also serve as energy stores for the body. In food, there are two types of fats: saturated and unsaturated.

**Triglyceride**
The chemical or substrate form in which most fat exists in food as well as in the body.

**Free fatty acids**
The by-products of the breakdown of stored or consumed fats, metabolized exclusively via the aerobic pathway, which uses oxygen to create adenosine triphosphate.

**Protein**
Amino acids linked by peptide bonds; the building blocks of body tissues.

**Essential amino acid (EAA)**
Amino acid that must be obtained through the diet as the body does not make it; there are nine essential amino acids.