---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Energy During Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The entire energy requirements of steady-state exercise is visualized in **Figure 8-10**. It begins with a person straddling a treadmill belt set at a steady light jogging pace (**Figure 8-10, segment A**). At the start of exercise (i.e., when the person jumps on the belt and goes from no activity to jogging), aerobic metabolic pathways are too slow to meet the initial demands, so the body relies on the ATP-PC cycle and glycolysis to make up the demand, known as an O~2 ~deficit (represented by the first shaded area, **Figure 8-10, segment B**).

Gradually, the rate of aerobic ATP production increases, and less and less energy needs to be derived from anaerobic sources. At this point a few minutes into the steady-state effort, oxidative metabolic processes are able to catch up and take over most ATP production duties. Once that point has been reached, the energy demand of the exercise is being met through aerobic means (**Figure 8-10, segment C**). That primarily aerobic state would essentially continue indefinitely, limited only by the exerciser’s muscular endurance and fitness level.

Then, when the person in the example steps off the treadmill, the energy demands start falling back to baseline quickly (**Figure 8-10, segment D**) and then more slowly (**Figure 8-10, segment E**), but the oxygen consumption remains elevated for a few minutes to keep generating ATP aerobically. This shaded area is often referred to as **excess postexercise oxygen consumption**, or **EPOC** (McArdle et al., 2010; Wells et al., 2009). The purpose of EPOC is to produce additional ATP (above and beyond what is needed for recovery) to help reestablish baseline levels of ATP and PC and to assist with clearing metabolic waste products. Once the ATP and PC levels have been restored and other physiologic processes have returned to normal, oxygen consumption will have returned close to baseline, and immediate recovery will be mostly complete.

## Metabolism During Intermittent Work

During intermittent exercise, this same energy production pattern as steady-state exercise occurs, just multiple times across a workout with each change in intensity. Just like the example in Figure 8-10, when an exerciser has to increase intensity, most of the energy needs come from anaerobic metabolism (Burke et al., 2011; Romijn et al., 1993; Wells et al., 2009). When intensity is decreased, there is a continued period of high, but briefly elevated, oxygen consumption in an attempt to recover quickly to be ready for the next bout of higher-intensity work. Essentially, intermittent work cycles between Figure 8-10, segments B and D, create repeated periods of EPOC without allowing the aerobic processes to fully take over as seen in Figure 8-10, segment C.

If the prior bout of high-intensity work is less than 1 minute, meaning it was primarily fueled by the ATP-PC system, the recovery period will also be about 1 minute or slightly less. If the period of high-intensity work is longer, such as in repeated interval training, the recovery period should have a similar 1-to-1 ratio of work-to-rest time (Daniels, 2014). Recovery is an aerobic event to set ATP-PC concentrations back toward normal and eliminate metabolic waste products. Therefore, even though interval training workouts and athletic competitions are quite often not steady-state efforts, participants really do need to have periods of training that address improving aerobic energy production to perform and recover optimally.

## Key Terms

**Excess postexercise oxygen consumption (EPOC)**
The state in which the body’s metabolism is elevated after exercise.

## Images

**Figure 8-10: Metabolism during steady-state exercise**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF10.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533