---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Total daily energy needs include calories for fueling RMR, TEF, NEAT, and EAT. If a person has a higher RMR, or engages in more NEAT or EAT, that person will need more calories to generate the ATP to support those activities (either from food or from internal stores). Some foods, such as protein, generate a higher TEF than others. Losing weight requires individuals to expend more energy from all processes (RMR, TEF, NEAT, and EAT) than they take in. To lose weight—since physical activity (including both NEAT and EAT) is a relatively small proportion of overall TDEE for many people—it is usually more effective to consume fewer calories than try to create the necessary energy deficit through activity alone. However, a combination of consuming fewer calories along with increases in physical activity and exercise is recommended by most experts.

### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 8 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 8 Audio Review

**00:0013:30**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- The human body needs a constant supply of energy to function properly and meet the demands of exercise.

	- The energy molecule used to do cellular work is called adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and it is made from food substrates consumed in the diet.

	- The first law of thermodynamics states that energy can neither be created nor destroyed, only converted from one form into another.

	- The fuels used to create ATP are glucose from carbohydrates, free fatty acids from fat, amino acids from protein, and ketone bodies. These fuels are mostly obtained through the diet.

	- Carbohydrates in the diet are broken down into glucose, which can produce ATP quickly via the process of glycolysis.

	- Glucose is stored in the form of glycogen; the amount of glycogen that can be stored in the body is much less than the amount of fat that can be stored.

	- Free fatty acids are the by-products of the breakdown of stored or consumed fats. They are oxidized exclusively via the aerobic pathway, which uses oxygen to create ATP.

	- Amino acids are the by-product of protein breakdown or digestion.

	- Amino acids can be metabolized via oxidative phosphorylation, but this is not typical in healthy people because protein is usually reserved for muscle building rather than ATP production.

	- Ketone bodies are produced by the liver during periods of low energy intake or low carbohydrate availability. They can be oxidized via the oxidative phosphorylation pathway to create ATP.

	- Exercise is categorized by two factors: intensity and duration. The higher the intensity of the activity, the shorter the duration must be.

	- To perform exercise, the body needs fuel, which comes from food that is broken down through a series of chemical reactions to provide energy (ATP) and heat.

	- The ATP-PC pathway is the simplest and fastest way to generate ATP. This system can only support short duration activities because the supply of PC is limited.

	- Glycolysis is an anaerobic process and generates ATP quickly, but not a tremendous amount. The end products of glycolysis are ATP and pyruvate, which can become lactate under anaerobic conditions.

	- Oxidative phosphorylation is a process that uses oxygen to create ATP from substrate molecules at a relatively slow rate.

	- Oxidative phosphorylation can use pyruvate (starting from glucose), fatty acids, amino acids, or ketone bodies as substrate molecules. This oxidative metabolism produces carbon dioxide as a by-product, which is then exhaled.

	- The most important factors determining the type of energy use during exercise are intensity and duration.

	- The intensity and duration of an activity are inversely related, which means that as intensity goes up, duration must go down.