---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Energy and Mechanical Work
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Oxidative phosphorylation uses a series of chemical reactions leading to the end result of creating ATP and carbon dioxide. This pathway includes two sets of reactions. Both sets occur in cellular organelles called the **mitochondria** (**Figure 8-8**). The first set of reactions is called the citric acid cycle (CAC), also known as the Krebs cycle, which leads to the creation of a few ATP molecules and the waste product of carbon dioxide. During this stage, electrons are freed for use in the next set of reactions known as the **electron transport chain (ETC)**, which uses those electrons to drive a complex series of reactions that create the most ATP.

The oxidative system is what the body primarily relies on for the majority of low- to moderate-intensity activity. While anaerobic processes last anywhere from a few seconds to a few minutes, aerobic metabolism can sustain the body indefinitely, just at increasingly lower intensity levels (Kalish et al., 2012). As a person’s cardiorespiratory fitness improves (i.e., the ability to deliver oxygen to the cells), so does the oxidative energy system’s ability to support higher intensity levels without having to preferentially activate the anaerobic processes.

#### OXIDATIVE METABOLISM OF DIFFERENT MACRONUTRIENTS

Whether carbohydrate, fat, or protein substrates are being used, they all must be broken down to the same substance, called **acetyl coenzyme A** (acetyl CoA), before they can enter the CAC (Gleeson, 2005). Acetyl CoA provides a common starting point for the enzymes used in the CAC, which removes the electrons from this molecule and transports the negatively charged electrons along with positively charged hydrogen ions to the ETC. These electrons and hydrogens are stored inside the mitochondria and then used to provide the energy that converts ADP into ATP.

To use fat substrates for aerobic energy production, the fat (e.g., triglycerides) must first be converted into free fatty acids and then further broken down to acetyl CoA in a process called **beta-oxidation**. Fat molecules are large, energy dense, and more complex than carbohydrates, which is why fat metabolism is slower and cannot keep up with high-intensity energy demands. Even though fat oxidation is slow, one fatty acid molecule can net significantly more ATP than glucose. For example, when one molecule of the fatty acid palmitate is fully metabolized, it yields 129 ATP.

Unlike the initial anaerobic metabolism of glucose, using fat as an energy source always requires oxygen. The rate at which a person can break down fat depends on the number of mitochondria in the muscle cell and the amount of oxygen delivered by the blood (Gleeson, 2005). Athletes and well-conditioned people tend to have more mitochondria in their muscle cells than sedentary individuals and are therefore better at breaking down fat (Nielsen et al., 2016).

## Key Terms

**Mitochondria**
The parts of the cell that use nutrients to create energy for the cell; commonly known as the powerhouses of the cell.

**Electron transport chain (ETC)**
A series of protein complexes that transfer protons and electrons received from the citric acid cycle through a series of reactions to create adenosine triphosphate.

**Acetyl coenzyme A**
Produced by the breakdown of carbohydrates through glycolysis and by the fatty acids through beta-oxidation and is the precursor for these substrates to the citric acid cycle.

**Beta-oxidation**
The first step in the process to break down fats via oxidative phosphorylation.

## Images

**Figure 8-8: Mitochondria**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533