---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Energy and Mechanical Work
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
When intensity continues long enough that the oxidative system can no longer support the activity, there is no other option but to slow down, rest, and recover (i.e., the point beyond VT2 commonly known as hitting a wall).

#### HELPFUL HINT

The contribution of all three energy systems must always add up to 100%. There is never a time where one is completely “turned off.” Even when the oxidative system is primarily supplying energy for a long-lasting intense activity, the other systems are working to replenish so they can again support increased bursts of intensity when needed.

### ATP-PC

The first of the ATP-generating metabolic pathways is known as the ATP-PC system, or the phosphagen or the phosphocreatine system (**Figure 8-4**). The body naturally creates stores of phosphocreatine by breaking down and converting certain amino acids. This system is the simplest and fastest way to generate more ATP. Essentially, it works by taking ADP left over from a previous muscle contraction and adds a phosphate taken from a phosphocreatine (PC) molecule, rapidly creating available ATP at the site where it needs to be used. This process does not require oxygen, which is why the ATP-PC energy pathway is considered **anaerobic**.

The ATP-PC system provides energy for primarily high-intensity, short-duration bouts of activity. This can be seen in strength and power forms of training in which very heavy loads are used with only a few repetitions or during short sprinting efforts. When activity rapidly intensifies, the small amounts of free ATP in the muscle tissue and the ATP-PC system can supply energy for only 10 to 15 seconds before running out (Wells et al., 2009). This system is activated at the onset of any increase in activity intensity because of its ability to produce energy very rapidly in comparison with the other systems. However, PC stores run out faster than they can be replenished, at which point other methods of ATP production must pick up the slack.

## Key Terms

**Anaerobic**
Processes relating to the absence of oxygen.

## Images

**Figure 8-4: The ATP-PC system**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533