---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Fuel for Energy Metabolism

Dietary food provides energy to sustain life and support physical activity, but not directly; it first must be broken down by the digestive system into smaller by-products called **substrates**. Proteins (more specifically, chains of amino acids), carbohydrates, and fats constitute the main substrates used to transfer metabolic energy to be used for all types of cellular activity and life (Becker & Smith, 2006; Gleeson, 2005; Kalish et al., 2012; Maughan, 2005). Since all energy substrates are forms of organic matter, many can be converted from one to the other within the body depending on what is needed. For example, the body can convert carbohydrate-based foods to fat molecules in order to store energy for later use. However, a small selection of substrates cannot be created internally in this manner and must be consumed in the diet. Those nutrients we must eat to live healthily are termed *essential*.

### GLUCOSE AND GLYCOGEN

**Glucose** is one of the main sources of energy, particularly for brain function and higher-intensity activity. Glucose can be made in the body from other substrates (fats and amino acids), but a large majority of our daily glucose needs come from consuming carbohydrate-based foods. Carbohydrates are consumed and broken down into glucose through digestion. Glucose is then absorbed and transported in the blood, where it circulates until it enters cells and is either used to make ATP or is stored for later. When it is stored, it is stored as string molecules in a branched structure called **glycogen**. Glycogen is stored in the liver and muscle cells and can be broken down rapidly to provide energy when there is not enough free glucose in the blood.

Glucose makes a relatively small contribution to overall energy production during rest or low-intensity exercise. The brain always requires glucose to function, but fats are what primarily fuel the body when it is not active.

## Key Terms

**Substrates**
Intermediate forms of nutrients used in metabolic reactions to create adenosine triphosphate.

**Glucose**
The simplest form of carbohydrate used by the body for energy.

**Glycogen**
Glucose that is deposited and stored in bodily tissues, such as the liver and muscle cells; the storage form of carbohydrate.