---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Protein
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
A larger amount of LBV protein may be required to provide all of the essential amino acids in adequate amounts to meet the individual’s needs. In contrast, if an individual’s diet is comprised primarily of very **high biological value (HBV)** proteins, then the individual may be meeting their amino acid needs with a smaller amount of total protein. Protein adequacy in a diet is an important consideration for all individuals, but it may be more so for clients who have a predominantly plant-based diet and who may need a greater amount of total protein to meet their amino acid needs (Marsh et al., 2013; Young & Pellet, 1994).

### GETTING TECHNICAL

Protein quality can be assessed using various standards that evaluate proteins in terms of their digestibility, their amino acid composition, and the efficiency with which the amino acids are absorbed and used by the body (Hoffman & Falvo, 2004; Millward et al., 2008).

**Protein efficiency ratio (PER)**: A value assigned to a protein that is based on the amount of weight gain of a subject divided by the amount ingested of that particular protein during a test period.

**Biological value (BV)**: A measure of the digestion and absorption of the amino acids provided by a protein source. BV reflects the amount of the absorbed protein that is used in the synthesis of new proteins in the body.

**Protein digestibility–corrected amino acid score (PDCAAS)**: Compares the amino acid composition of a food against a standard amino acid profile, with a score of 100 being the highest value possible. It also assesses the food’s digestibility (fecal digestibility) to provide an overall value for the protein’s quality.

**Net protein utilization (NPU)**: Compares the ratio of amino acids that are turned into proteins to the ratio of amino acids provided via dietary intake.

### TRY THIS

**HBV Versus LBV Proteins**

Egg whites, whole eggs, chicken breast, and lean beef are considered to be high-quality, complete proteins with high digestibility (PDCAAS) scores in the range of 0.90 to 1.00 (egg white). In comparison, LBV proteins, such as beans, lentils, peas, and whole wheat, have lower PDCAAS scores in the range of 0.4 to 0.7 (Food and Drug Administration, 2018). Thus, 30 grams of high-quality, usable protein with all the EAAs could be obtained by eating around 4 eggs or 4.5 ounces of chicken breast (HBV) or around 3 cups of chickpeas with brown rice, which provide more than 30 grams of total protein but are given a lower PDCAAS score.

## Protein Digestion, Absorption, and Utilization

To obtain amino acids from dietary protein, it must be broken down into smaller molecules: single amino acids, dipeptides, and tripeptides. This process takes place in the gastrointestinal tract. When a source of protein is consumed, hydrochloric acid in the stomach denatures it, which means the secondary and tertiary structures are unraveled to expose the primary structure of the protein.

## Key Terms

**High biological value (HBV) proteins**
Foods containing all the essential amino acids.

**Protein efficiency ratio (PER)**
A measure of assessing proteins, based on the amount of weight gained by a test subject divided by the amount of intake of a protein food.

**Biological value (BV)**
A reference amount used to describe the extent to which the amino acids in a protein source are absorbed.

**Protein digestibility– corrected amino acid score (PDCAAS)**
A measure for evaluating a protein source based on the composition of amino acids and its digestibility.

**Net protein utilization (NPU)**
The ratio of amino acid mass turned into proteins compared to the total amino acid mass consumed in the diet.