---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Protein
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Individuals who eat an **omnivorous diet**, which includes both animal and plant foods, will easily obtain all the essential amino acids through their diet, as animal foods are complete protein sources. However, individuals who are vegan or vegetarian will need to include in their diet a diverse range of plant protein sources to obtain adequate amounts of all essential amino acids. Most vegetarian sources of protein lack one or two essential amino acids. However, an assorted range of vegetarian proteins can ensure that essential amino acids lacking in one food source are provided by another, such as combining rice and beans. This is called **mutual supplementation**. When working with vegan or vegetarian clients, it may be helpful to reinforce the importance of a varied and balanced diet for health and performance and for adequate protein intake. If clients express interest in learning about vegan and vegetarian protein sources and planning a balanced vegan or vegetarian diet, it may be helpful to direct them to a registered dietitian or certified nutritionist for further nutrition counseling.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, and vegetables are all considered to be incomplete sources of protein as they contain some but not all of the essential amino acids. However, they differ in their composition. For example, beans and vegetables are limited in methionine, nuts and seeds are limited in lysine, corn is limited in both tryptophan and lysine, and grains are limited in lysine and threonine (Mariotti & Gardner, 2019).

Eating a balanced mix of all these sources can help to ensure that all essential amino acids are provided in a vegetarian diet. Note that complementary proteins do not have to be eaten at the same meal; it is sufficient if they are eaten over the course of the same day for mutual supplementation.

Modified from Mariotti & Gardner, 2019.

### PROTEIN QUALITY

**Protein quality **refers to the amino acid profile and content of a protein source and its digestibility (Hoffman & Falvo, 2004; Wolfe et al., 2016). Some proteins, such as animal-based proteins, are considered to be higher in quality because they contain all of the essential amino acids and are easily digested and absorbed by the body.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Note that the term quality in this instance does not refer to the source or farming method of the animal, such as whether or not the protein source is organic, nonorganic, grass, or corn fed. Protein quality refers to the essential amino acid composition and digestibility of a protein source.

Protein quality may be an important consideration in some diets, because it may affect an individual’s total protein requirements in their diet. If an individual’s diet is comprised primarily of **low biological value (LBV)** proteins, then total protein requirements may be higher.

## Key Terms

**Omnivorous diet**
A diet that consists of both animals and plants.

**Mutual supplementation**
Combination of two incomplete protein sources that together provide all of the essential amino acids.

**Protein quality**
Refers to the amino acid profile and the digestibility of a protein source.

**Low biological value (LBV) proteins**
Foods missing one or more of the essential amino acids.