---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Micronutrients and Hydration
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Micronutrients and Hydration

Micronutrients include vitamins, minerals, and phytonutrients, which are plant-based nutrients. They are not considered an energy source because they do not provide any calories, but they are important in the regulation of various metabolic processes, including energy **metabolism**. Inadequate intake of vitamins and minerals can contribute to micronutrient deficiencies and insufficiencies, which affect an individual’s health status. All vitamins and minerals are considered to be essential nutrients, with the exception of vitamin D, niacin, and biotin, because these essential nutrients are produced in our bodies under certain conditions. Thus, most vitamins and minerals must be obtained through the diet. A well-balanced, healthy diet of mostly minimally processed whole foods can help meet micronutrient needs of most healthy adults. However, supplementation may be helpful and necessary in cases of inadequate intakes (picky eaters), deficiencies, and/or increased nutrient needs, such as injury, illness, and high-volume or intensity training.

## Vitamins

Vitamins may be classified into two groups: fat soluble and water soluble. The fat-soluble vitamins are vitamins A, D, E, and K. The water-soluble vitamins include vitamin C and the large group of B vitamins.

### FAT-SOLUBLE VITAMINS

Fat-soluble vitamins require fat for digestion and absorption; they travel through the lymphatic system and circulate with other fat-soluble nutrients to the liver, where they are repackaged with lipoproteins and redistributed to other organs and tissues. Fat-soluble vitamins may be stored in the liver and adipose (fat) tissue and are not generally needed in the diet on a daily basis. **Table 9-15** lists the fat-soluble vitamins, their primary functions, and good food sources of these nutrients.

**TABLE 9-15 Fat-Soluble Vitamins**

| Fat-Soluble Vitamin | Primary Roles | Food Sources |
|---|---|---|
| A | Vision (preservation and health of retina)
	Epithelial (outer lining of organs, blood vessels and skin) regeneration
	Gene expression
	Immune function
	Growth | Egg yolk, liver
	Orange and muddy green vegetables (carrots, pumpkin, sweet potato, butternut squash, apricots, Swiss chard, kale, collard greens) |
| D | Calcium absorption
	Regulation of parathyroid hormone (a hormone that controls calcium levels)
	Immune function
	Gene expression | Fatty fish
	Egg yolk
	Dairy |
| E | Antioxidant activity (preservation of cell structure)
	Prevention of oxidative damage to DNA | Nuts, seeds, and oils
	Wheat germ
	Canola oil
	Sunflower seeds |
| K | Blood clotting
	Bone health and bone resorption | Dark, leafy greens (spinach, kale, Swiss chard, collard greens, mustard greens)
	Broccoli, Brussels sprouts |

## Key Terms

**Metabolism**
All of the chemical reactions that occur in the body to maintain itself.