---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Food Labels
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## UK Food Labels

Food labels in the United Kingdom (UK) and European Union (EU) differ in a few ways from those in the United States. One of the biggest differences is that the United States displays nutrition information for a specified serving size of a product, whereas the UK and EU nutrition information panels provide nutrient information for a standard amount of the product: 100 g of a dry product or 100 or 200 mL of a liquid product (**Figure 9-11**).

Like the U.S. label, the nutrition information panel in the United Kingdom and European Union provides information on the number of calories in the reference amount of the product, along with the amount of total fat, saturated fat, carbohydrate, sugar, fiber, protein and salt, and vitamins D and B6. Calories are listed as kilojoules or kilocalories, and salt content is listed in place of sodium. Vitamins and minerals that have been added to a food product must also be listed on the nutrition information panel, along with their amounts in the reference quantity (e.g., 100 g). Instead of the %DVs, food labels in the United Kingdom and European Union use **percent reference intake (% RI)** on the nutrition information panel. Like the U.S. %DV, the % RI enables consumers to see how a product contributes nutritionally toward their reference intake values for the listed nutrients. Both the % RI and the U.S. %DV enable consumers to make informed decisions by comparing products for their nutritional value and contribution to their diet (**Figure 9-12**).

## Key Terms

**Percent reference intake (% RI)**
Used on food labels in the United Kingdom and the European Union. It is a reference value that indicates what percentage of the recommend amount of a nutrient is met by the specified amount (100 g or 100 mL) of the food product.

## Images

**Figure 9-11: Nutrition information panel in the United Kingdom**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH09_FIGF11.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 9-12: Percent reference intake**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH09_FIGF12.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533