---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Food Labels
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### COLOR CODING ON UK AND EU FOOD LABELS

Most UK food labels also display a color-coded chart that displays the amount of fat, saturated fat, sugar, and salt in a product (**Figure 9-13**). These nutrients are highlighted using a color scheme to help consumers quickly identify if a product contains high (red) or low (green) amounts, as dietary guidelines recommended limiting these particular nutrients in the diet. A yellow highlight indicates that the product is a “medium” source of the nutrient and that it should be consumed with caution, in moderate amounts.

### FOOD LABEL INGREDIENTS LIST

The ingredients list on food labels is also an important source of information. In both the United States and the United Kingdom, food products must list all the ingredients included in the package, in decreasing order of prevalence. This means that the first ingredient listed is present in the largest quantity. Common food allergens must also be listed, whether they are included in the product or may have come into contact with any of the ingredients (Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 2013; Gov.UK, n.d.).

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Food labels in the United Kingdom must also specify the percentage of an ingredient in a product if it is included in the product name or highlighted on the food label or is an ingredient typically associated with the product (Gov.UK, n.d.). For example, a mixed berry jam in the United Kingdom would need to list the percentage of berries included in the jam since berries are noted in the name and are typically associated with the product.

Clients can also use the ingredient list to see if a product is primarily comprised of whole foods or if it is a highly processed product with many ingredients, additives, and preservatives. In general, whole food products tend to have shorter ingredient lists, with easily recognizable ingredients. The longer the ingredient list, the greater the likelihood that it contains refined ingredients and additives. The exceptions are food products that have been fortified with vitamins and minerals, because producers are required to include the added micronutrients in the ingredient list.

## Images

**Figure 9-13: Color coding on a food label from the United Kingdom**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH09_FIGF13.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533