---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Protein
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Protein

**Protein**, one of the three macronutrients, serves a variety of important functions in the body. One of the primary functions of protein is in the synthesis and repair of cells, tissues, and structures, such as collagen, elastin, and muscle. Proteins are also required for the synthesis of hormones, enzymes, antibodies, and peptides, as well as the transport of various compounds through the body, such as lipids and minerals (e.g., calcium). In addition, proteins may be used for energy if there is a need due to inadequate caloric, carbohydrate, or fat intake.

## Structure of Protein

The basic building block of a protein is an amino acid, which is a compound that contains carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and a nitrogen atom. Proteins are comprised of sequences of **amino acids** that are linked together by **peptide bonds** in polypeptide chains (**Figure 9-1**).

© Nasky/Shutterstock.comFigure 9-1Amino acids, peptides, and proteins

Amino acids are often thought of as the building blocks of protein, because they are required to both synthesize and repair proteins in our body. There are 20 amino acids, of which nine are considered **essential amino acids (EAAs)**, meaning that they must be obtained through the diet and cannot be made in the body. The other 11 amino acids are considered nonessential, since they can be made in the body as long as there are adequate essential amino acids and **substrates** for their synthesis. The body’s supply of amino acids is derived from two sources: protein consumption from foods and supplements or the breakdown of internal protein sources and body tissue. The process of breaking down internal proteins and recycling the component amino acids is called **protein turnover**, and it serves as an important source of amino acids for the synthesis of new proteins.

## Key Terms

**Protein**
Amino acids linked by peptide bonds; the building blocks of body tissues.

**Amino acids**
Organic building blocks of proteins containing both a carboxyl and an amino group.

**Peptide bond**
A chemical bond that connects two amino acids.

**Essential amino acid (EAA)**
Amino acid that must be obtained through the diet as the body does not make it; there are nine essential amino acids.

**Substrates**
Intermediate forms of nutrients used in metabolic reactions to create adenosine triphosphate.

**Protein turnover**
A process in which the body breaks down existing proteins and recycles the component amino acids for incorporation into new proteins or other nitrogen-containing compounds.

## Images

**Figure 9-1: Amino acids, peptides, and proteins**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH09_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533