---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction and Preparticipation Health Screening
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
For example, general eating behaviors can be collected rather than calculations of portion sizes and tracked calories. Some examples to consider include answers to the following questions:

	- On a scale of 0 to 10, do you consider your overall diet to be healthy? (0 for unhealthy and 10 for very healthy).

	- Are you currently following any kind of diet? If so, what diet and for what reason(s)?

	- How would you rank your daily salt intake: low, medium, or high?

	- How would you rank your daily sugar intake: low, medium, or high?

	- How would you rank your daily fat intake: low, medium, or high?

	- On a scale of 0 to 10, how effectively are you able to control your temptations for junk food (0 for easily and 10 for very difficult)?

	- How many alcoholic drinks do you consume per week?

	- Do you consume caffeinated beverages such as coffee, tea, soda, and/or energy drinks? How many per week?

Gathering this information helps the fitness professional, without preexisting judgment or presumptions, gain further insight into the client’s dietary habits. Over time, the client’s eating habits can be reevaluated to determine if any improvements (or setbacks) have been made. In addition, gathering this information assists the fitness professional to ascertain if the client should be referred to a registered dietitian or medical professional due to an unexpected concern.

#### SLEEP

Sleep quality and quantity is another area of interest. Fitness professionals should inquire about their clients’ sleeping habits, including the number of hours slept each night, the quality of sleep, and even the difficulties associated with falling asleep. Sleep is necessary, and when done right, it replenishes energy stores depleted from exercise and physical activity (Dolezal et al., 2017). Conversely, chronic sleep deprivation has many health consequences, such as elevated risk for chronic disease and negative impact on cognition and mood, to name a few (Alvarez & Ayas, 2004; Dashti et al., 2015). It is important to recognize that it is out of scope for fitness professionals to perform detailed sleep evaluations or recommend clinical treatment to improve sleep quality. However, gaining basic insight into a client’s sleeping habits provides a coaching opportunity on the importance of getting a good night’s sleep.

#### STRESS

Stress is becoming a more prominent aspect of life and can cause serious health effects, including raising the risk of chronic disease (Yaribeygi et al., 2017). Fitness professionals should inquire about their clients’ stress levels, such as using a scaling system of 0 to 10 to rate their average stress level. Conversations about stress are also relevant. Fitness professionals should investigate whether or not the individual is cognitively aware of their sources of stress, the frequency with which the individual is exposed to specific stressors, the magnitude of each stressor, and whether or not the person has identified or implemented any methods to manage these stressors.

Similar to sleep, it is beyond a fitness professional’s scope of practice to provide counseling services and mental health treatment for stress management. However, gaining a basic overview of the client’s stress levels provides a coaching opportunity. Fitness professionals can share with their client how exercise and physical activity can improve mood and disposition and reduce stress when integrated into a daily routine.