---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Anthropometry and Body Composition Measurements
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
# Anthropometry and Body  Composition Measurements

**Anthropometry **is the field of study of the measurement of living humans for purposes of understanding physical variation in size, weight, and proportion. Many different anthropometric measures exist, including body fat assessments, **body mass index (BMI)**, and **circumference measurements**. Although many clients have goals of weight loss, what is really implied is a loss of fat mass while retaining or perhaps gaining lean muscle mass. While scale weight can measure and monitor weight loss, it is unable to determine the relative ratios of fat and muscle mass potentially being lost.

The purpose behind body composition measurements is to quantify body compositional changes (e.g., losses of fat mass) from which an individual can be classified as healthy or unhealthy. Currently, there is no universally accepted, standard percentage of body fat for all ages and genders. In general, men’s body fat percentages are lower than those for women. These studies demonstrate that healthy body fat typically ranges from about 10% to 20% for men and about 20% to 30% for women, although these ranges can vary significantly based on the individual’s age, gender, and ethnicity (Heo et al., 2012).

## Body Mass Index

BMI is a rough assessment based on the concept that a person’s weight should be proportional to his or her height. An elevated BMI is linked to increased risk of disease, especially if associated with a large waist circumference (Aune et al., 2016). Although this assessment is not designed to assess body fat, BMI is a quick and easy method for determining whether a person’s weight is appropriate for that person’s height.

## Key Terms

**Anthropometry**
The field of study of the measurement of living humans for purposes of understanding human physical variation in size, weight, and proportion.

**Body mass index (BMI)**
The measurement of a person’s weight relative to his or her height, which is used to estimate the risks of obesity.

**Circumference measurement**
The measurement that determines the overall dimension (girth) of a body segment, which can be used to estimate body composition or the prevalence of obesity.