---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Cardiorespiratory Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
## YMCA 3-Minute Step Test

The **YMCA 3-minute step test** is a cardiorespiratory assessment that assesses the aerobic fitness of deconditioned clients by having them complete 3 minutes of continuous stepping on and off a 12-in. (30-cm) box. With this assessment, cardiorespiratory fitness is evaluated from the **recovery heart rate (RHR)** rather than from an estimate of VO~2max~. The YMCA 3-minute step test is considered suitable for low-risk, apparently healthy, nonathletic adults.

**YMCA 3-Minute Step Test Instructions**

	- Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions satisfactorily, and allow adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery prior to conducting the test.

	- Ensure that proper athletic footwear is worn for the test.

	- Terminate the test if the individual experiences any symptoms of light-headedness, dizziness, chest pain, or excessive shortness of breath.

	- The client will perform 96 steps per minute. Fitness professionals can demonstrate proper step cadence by setting a metronome to 96 “clicks” per minute and allow practice trials. If the fitness professional does not have access to a metronome, they can state out loud, “up, up, down, down” to help keep the correct cadence.

	- Begin the 3-minute test and maintain cadence throughout the test.

	- After completing the test, the individual sits while the fitness professional quickly palpates the radial pulse (within 5 seconds) and measures the number of heartbeats over the ensuing 60 seconds.

		- Count starts at zero.

		- The individual should lightly paddle feet to maintain circulation.

		- Allow for a proper cool-down following data collection.

**Test Interpretation:**

Once the 60-second HR count is collected, the individual’s fitness level can be categorized using **Table 11-13**.

The YMCA 3-minute step test is very basic and does not impose much of a cardiovascular challenge for aerobically fit adults. It is primarily intended as a protocol for deconditioned individuals or older adults who do not have any balance, joint issues, or concerns associated with stepping to measure how quickly their heart rate returns to normal after exercise.

**TABLE 11-13 YMCA 3-Minute Step Test**

| Ratings for Men (age) | 18–25 | 26–35 | 36–45 | 46–55 | 56–65 | ≥65 |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Excellent | 50–76 | 51–76 | 49–76 | 56–82 | 60–77 | 59–81 |
| Good | 79–84 | 79–85 | 80–88 | 87–93 | 86–94 | 87–92 |
| Above average | 88–93 | 88–94 | 92–88 | 95–101 | 97–100 | 94–102 |
| Average | 95–100 | 96–102 | 100–105 | 103–111 | 103–109 | 104–110 |
| Below average | 102–107 | 104–110 | 108–113 | 113–119 | 111–117 | 114–118 |
| Poor | 111–119 | 114–121 | 116–124 | 121–126 | 119–128 | 121–126 |
| Very poor | 124–157 | 126–161 | 130–163 | 131–159 | 131–154 | 130–151 |
| Ratings for Women (age) | 18-25 | 26–35 | 36–45 | 46–55 | 56–65 | ≥65 |
| Excellent | 52–81 | 58–80 | 51–84 | 63–91 | 60–92 | 70–92 |
| Good | 85–93 | 85–92 | 89–96 | 95–101 | 97–103 | 96–101 |
| Above average | 96–102 | 95–101 | 100–104 | 104–110 | 106–111 | 104–111 |
| Average | 104–110 | 104–110 | 107–112 | 113–118 | 113–118 | 116–121 |
| Below average | 113–120 | 113–119 | 115–120 | 120–124 | 119–127 | 123–126 |
| Poor | 122–131 | 122–129 | 124–132 | 126–132 | 129–135 | 128–133 |
| Very poor | 135–169 | 134–171 | 137–169 | 137–171 | 141–174 | 135–155 |