---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction and Preparticipation Health Screening
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
#### OCCUPATION

Occupational demands and work history also provide valuable insight into potential conditions and concerns. Fitness professionals should inquire about these aspects of their client’s work:

	- The nature of the client’s occupation

	- Whether the job requires extended periods of time standing, sitting, or performing repetitive movements (with explanations)

	- The workspace environment (e.g., office layout) and typical attire (e.g., shoes with elevated heels)

If clients are sitting for long periods throughout the day, their hips are also flexed for prolonged periods, which in turn can potentially lead to overactive hip flexors and low-back pain (Gupta et al., 2015). Moreover, if clients are sitting for prolonged periods, especially in front of a computer, there is a tendency for the shoulders and head to experience fatigue under the constant effect of gravity, which can lead to postural imbalances, including rounding of the shoulders and a forward head. In addition, prolonged periods of sitting are indicative of low energy expenditure throughout the day and potentially poor cardiorespiratory conditioning.

Wearing shoes with high heels puts the ankle complex in a plantarflexed position for extended periods, which can lead to tightness in the calf muscles and Achilles tendons, causing postural imbalance, such as decreased dorsiflexion and overpronation at the foot and ankle complex, resulting in flattening of the arch of the foot (Barnish & Barnish, 2016). This may lead to pain in the feet, knees, hips, or low-back.

#### RECREATION AND HOBBIES

In the context of a fitness assessment, recreation refers to a client’s physical activities outside of the work environment, also referred to as leisure time. By discovering the recreational activities that a client performs, a Certified Personal Trainer can better design an exercise program to fit the needs of their clients. For example, many clients like to dance, golf, ski, play tennis, or perform a variety of other sporting activities in their spare time. Proper exercise training must be incorporated to ensure that clients are conditioned in a manner that optimizes their physical ability, without predisposing them to injury.

Hobbies refer to activities that a client might enjoy on a regular basis but are not necessarily athletic in nature. Examples can include gardening, car repair, fishing, singing, or playing music. Many common types of hobbies do not involve vigorous physical activity, yet still need to be considered to create a properly planned exercise training program.

### MEDICAL HISTORY

Obtaining a client’s medical history is vitally important because it provides fitness professionals with information about known or suspected chronic diseases, such as coronary heart disease, high blood pressure, or diabetes. In addition, fitness professionals should inquire if their client smokes or uses tobacco products. Furthermore, a medical history provides information about the client’s past and current health status, as well as any past or recent injuries, surgeries, or other chronic health conditions. Gathering this information helps determine if a client is ready for a new exercise routine or if a medical referral is necessary.

#### PAST INJURIES

All past or recent injuries should be recorded and discussed in enough detail to make decisions about whether exercise is recommended, or if a medical referral is necessary. Previous history of musculoskeletal injury is also a strong predictor of future injury during physical activity (Fulton et al., 2014).