---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Cardiorespiratory Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
#### EXAMPLE VT1 TEST

**Table 11-17** provides an example of an incrementally staged treadmill run in which VT1 is determined via the continuous talk test. In this example, 1-minute stages were selected because of the small work increments (i.e., 0.5 mph per stage), which is usually ample time to attain a SS heart rate response. At minute 9 (6.5 mph), the continuous talk test becomes challenging, which corresponds to a heart rate of 142 beats per minute (bpm) and an RPE (10-point scale) of 6.5. At 6.0 mph, breathing and continuous talking remain somewhat easy, whereas at 7.0 mph, they become difficult. As mentioned previously in the protocol instructions, the continuous talk test should ideally be conducted on two separate occasions for reliability purposes, with the average score being recorded as VT1.

**TABLE 11-17 Example of a VT1 Test With 1-Minute Incremental Increases**

| Time | Speed | Talk Test | HR | RPE 1–10 |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Warm-up (minutes 1–4) | 4.0 mph |  |  |  |
| Minute 5 | 4.5 mph | Easy | 117 | 3.5 |
| Minute 6 | 5.0 mph | Easy | 125 | 4 |
| Minute 7 | 5.5 mph | Somewhat easy | 133 | 5 |
| Minute 8 | 6.0 mph | Somewhat easy | 138 | 6 |
| Minute 9 | 6.5 mph | Challenging | 142 | 6.5 |
| Minute 10 | 7.0 mph | Difficult | 147 | 7 |
| Cool down (minute 11–14) | 4.0 mph |  |  |  |

Proficiency in identifying VT1 depends largely on the fitness professional’s ability to accurately determine when continuous talking becomes challenging. This may take time, practice, and repetition, but once proficiency is established, this skill set will allow the fitness professional to identify an individualized and unique metabolic event where the body shifts from fat as its primary fuel to an equal mix of fat and carbohydrate fuel sources. This intensity will serve as an important intensity marker when designing cardiorespiratory exercise programs.

### VT2 TALK TEST

For individuals who have more performance-centric goals, their capacity to sustain high-intensity work becomes important as a predictor of success. The **ventilatory threshold 2 (VT2) talk test** measures the level at which the body can work at its highest sustainable steady-state intensity for more than a few minutes. At this level, the body relies heavily on the **anaerobic energy systems** that begin to overwhelm the blood’s lactic acid buffering capacity.

In fact, Recalde and colleagues (2002) demonstrated that VT2 corresponds with an individual’s inability to speak during exercise. In other words, at this level of intensity, the individual cannot verbally respond to a question or responds “no” to the question, Can you speak competently?

## Key Terms

**Ventilatory threshold 2 (VT2)**
The point where glucose provides nearly all of the energy for the activity.

**Anaerobic energy systems**
Energy systems used to perform work in which glycogen is converted to glucose and oxygen is insufficient to break down pyruvate and create adenosine triphosphate.