---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Cardiorespiratory Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
### GETTING TECHNICAL

Another popular cardiorespiratory assessment is the 1-mile (1.6-km) run test. Although this test is practically feasible, its ability to evaluate cardiorespiratory fitness across the general population is limited because its validation (i.e., research studies) was focused primarily on youth and college-aged individuals (Kayihan et al., 2014; Sharon & Liu, 1999). The 1.5-mile run test provides a more valid evaluation of aerobic fitness across a larger population group and is therefore considered a more appropriate test to use with clients. However, because the duration of this assessment is longer than the 1-mile run test, there is certainly more of a demand for experience and pacing throughout this assessment.

### GETTING TECHNICAL

Perhaps the biggest limitation of the assessments discussed is that they only provide generalized estimates of aerobic fitness rather than a personalized score unique to the individual. Therefore, research and newer ideas have evolved to assess cardiorespiratory fitness and efficiency based on a person’s unique metabolism (Foster et al., 2008).

## The Talk Test

The** talk test **(or continuous talk method) is an informal cardiorespiratory assessment used to gauge the intensity of the activity based on the client’s own unique metabolic markers and ability to hold a conversation. Gauging the client’s ability or inability to talk continuously during aerobic exercise has existed as a nonspecific guide for exercise intensity for many years. However, over the past 20 years, researchers have investigated this concept further and determined that intensity that disrupts talking and breathing is connected to specific metabolic events happening within the body’s energy systems (Dehart-Beverly et al., 2000; Foster et al., 2009; Jeans et al., 2011; Loose et al., 2012; Voelker et al., 2001; Zanettini et al., 2013).

## Key Terms

**Talk test**
An aerobic test that measures the participant’s ability to talk or hold a conversation during an activity at various intensity levels.