---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Cardiorespiratory Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
### THE VENTILATORY THRESHOLD (VT1) TEST

The** ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1)** test is an incremental test performed on any device (e.g., treadmill, bicycle) that gradually progresses in intensity level and relies on the interpretation of the way a person talks to determine a specific event at which the body’s metabolism undergoes a significant change.

A key point for this protocol is to remember that it is an aerobic test that aims to estimate the intensity of the body’s usage of a balance of fuels (i.e., 50% fat, 50% carbohydrates). Because it is an aerobic test, **steady-state (SS) heart rate** must be attained before any assessment of talking is collected.

**VT1 Test Considerations**

	- Determine the preferred exercise modality (e.g., treadmill, bicycle).

	- Determine the preference for increasing workloads (e.g., speed, grade, wattage). A range of 0.5 to 1 mph increases or 1% to 2% inclines are used for treadmills; 15- to 25-watt increases are used for cycling, and 10- to 15-watt increases are used for arm ergometers.

	- Determine the duration of each stage. Stages usually last between 1 and 3 minutes to ensure that SS heart rate is attained. Larger increases in intensity require longer durations to attain SS heart rate and are not recommended. Remember, SS heart rate implies a visible leveling of the client’s heart rate at each stage, rather than continuing to climb upwards.

	- Conduct the continuous talk test once a steady state heart rate is attained. The continuous talk test involves speaking continuously for about 20 seconds, although the talking challenge can usually be observed within 10 seconds. The continuous talk test must be continuous and recited from memory, for example, the phonetic alphabet: “A is for apple, B is for boy, C is for cat.” Another option is to have the client share information regarding their typical morning routine, detailing the steps involved in getting ready for work or school. Just remember that the dialogue they provide needs to be continuous, as explained previously.

**VT1 Test Instructions**

	- Briefly discuss the protocol, answer all questions, and allow adequate warm-up, stretching, and recovery before starting the test.

	- Begin the test at an intensity considered light to easy and gradually progress through incremental stages, performing the continuous talk test toward the end of each stage, once an SS heart rate is attained.

	- Repeat the continuous talk test until the talk test becomes challenging, but not difficult, for the client. This is a sign that the client has reached VT1. At this moment, record the client’s heart rate and speed, grade, or wattage, depending on which type of equipment is being used.

	- Evaluate the challenge of continuous talking:

		- Observe the ability to speak continuously at a conversational pace (e.g., smooth, streamlined, and continuous versus choppy, interrupted, and disjointed).

		- Ask the individual to rate the challenge (e.g., an easy, small challenge, an uncomfortable/challenging task, or a difficult, nearly impossible task); VT1 is marked as uncomfortable or challenging.

		- Listen to the client’s breathing sounds; VT1 occurs when breathing becomes clearly audible with fairly visible signs of rib cage elevation.

	- Consider continuing one stage beyond the suspected VT1 stage to validate the assessment.

Ideally, this protocol should be repeated within 2 to 3 days for purposes of reliability; use the average physiological response to notate the client’s VT1.

## Key Terms

**Ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1)**
The point at which the body uses an equal mix of carbohydrate and fat as fuel sources.

**Steady-state (SS) heart rate**
Any stage at which the physiological response of heart rate from the cardiovascular system becomes relatively constant in relation to the amount of work being performed (i.e., the heart rate response matches the level of work being performed).