---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
### CHAPTER REVIEW

Postural, movement, and performance assessments are integral parts of the intake process for all clients and will assist the fitness professional in developing customized fitness programs to enhance a client’s well-being.

Static postural assessments allow the fitness professional to look for any deviations from optimal alignment of the body. The static postural assessment begins by observing the feet and traveling upwards toward the head. The fitness professional will observe the client’s posture from anterior, lateral, and posterior views, looking for neutral alignment, symmetry, balanced muscle tone, and common postural deviations within the kinetic chain. Three common postural distortion patterns to look for during a static postural assessment include pes planus distortion, lower crossed, and upper crossed syndromes.

The overhead squat is used to assess dynamic posture, core stability, and neuromuscular control of the whole body during a squatting motion. Recognizing movement impairments during the overhead squat assessment helps identify probable muscle imbalances exhibited by the client, essential to designing client-centric programming. The overhead squat assessment is observed from the anterior and lateral views. Two common movement impairments to observe from the anterior view include feet turning out and knee valgus (knees caving inward). From the lateral view, common movement impairments include an anterior pelvic tilt, excessive forward lean of the torso, and arms falling forward. Fitness professionals should use this information to determine which muscles require additional stretching and which muscles need additional strengthening to correct movement impairments and muscle imbalances.

The single-leg squat is an advanced movement assessment and a progression from the OHSA. The single-leg squat assessment has been shown to have strong inter- and intrarater reliability. This assessment should only be performed on apparently healthy clients who do not pose a significant risk of falling. The fitness professional will observe their client from the anterior view looking for knee valgus.

The pushing and pulling assessments evaluate scapular and shoulder mechanics and stability of the LPHC, cervical spine, and head. Fitness professionals should look for the following movement impairments: low-back arching, shoulders elevating, or head jutting forward. Each of these movement impairments indicates potential muscle imbalances that can be corrected using stretching and strengthening techniques.

Performance assessments are used to assess athletic performance or specific fitness measures, including maximal strength, power, muscular endurance, and agility. Performance assessments include the push-up test, bench press strength assessment, squat strength assessment, vertical jump, long jump, LEFT, 40-yard dash, and pro shuttle (5-10-5). Some of these might not be suitable for all clients. The Certified Personal Training should only conduct assessments that relate to the client’s specific fitness goals, needs, and abilities.

Proper sequencing of fitness assessments is important to minimize skewed results. Non-fatiguing, low physical exertion assessments should be conducted prior to assessments that require physical exertion. The fitness professional should use the following assessment sequence: preparticipation health screening, physiological assessments, body composition assessments, postural and movement assessments, cardiorespiratory assessments, and finally performance assessments. However, performance assessments that cause little fatigue can be administered prior to cardio tests if sufficient rest periods are provided.

Populations that may require additional considerations or modifications when conducting fitness assessments include overweight and obese, youth, prenatal, and older adult clients.