---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Observing Dynamic Posture
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
For example, a client may display knee valgus while squatting, but the cause of the movement impairment could be caused by hip or ankle dysfunction (or both). Each joint region has a specific biomechanical motion that it produces based on its own structure and function, as well as the joints above and below it (Janda, 2002; Nakagawa, 2012a; Powers, 2010; Sueki et al., 2013). When that specific motion deviates from its normal path, it is considered a movement impairment and can be used to presume possible muscle imbalance or joint dysfunction (Barton et al., 2013; Bolgla et al., 2008; Cichanowski et al., 2007; Nakagawa, 2012a, 2012b; Powers, 2010; Souza & Powers, 2009).

It should be noted that the term* movement impairment* is simply being used to describe a client’s abnormal movement when it deviates from optimal postural alignment while in motion. The fitness professional should be careful how they explain these movement impairments to the client to avoid embarrassing or discouraging them. Instead, the focus should remain on helping the client move more safely and efficiently.

## Overhead Squat Assessment

The **overhead squat assessment (OHSA)** is typically the first movement assessment that is used for most clients. An individual’s movement quality during this assessment often provides valuable information about what areas of the body need to be addressed through focused exercise programming. The findings from this assessment can also serve as the basis for all additional movement assessments.

The overhead squat is designed to assess dynamic posture, core stability, and neuromuscular control (i.e., coordination) of the whole body during a squatting motion. Research suggests that the presence of movement impairments during squatting motions is predictive of the risk of musculoskeletal injuries in individuals who practice physical exercise (Eckard et al., 2018; Padua et al., 2018; Santos Bunn et al., 2018). Further, observational screening during the overhead squat is a valid method to identify movement impairments, such as knee valgus and limited ankle mobility (Padua et al., 2012; Post et al., 2017; Rabin & Kozol, 2017).

Recognizing movement impairments during the OHSA helps the fitness professional identify their clients’ muscle imbalances. Using this information, the fitness professional can create an exercise program that aims to correct these muscle imbalances by stretching identified overactive muscles and strengthening identified underactive muscles.

### OHSA Starting Position (Figure 12-5)

	- The client stands on a flat, stable surface with the feet shoulder-width apart and pointing straight ahead.

	- The foot and ankle complex should be in a neutral position.

	- Ideally, the assessment should be performed with the shoes off to better view the client’s foot and ankle complex.

	- The client should raise their arms completely overhead with elbows fully extended.

### OHSA Movement (Figure 12-6)

	- The client should squat to a depth that brings the femur parallel to the ground (approximately chair height) and then return to the starting position. The squat depth can be reduced if the client has discomfort or is incapable of performing a squat to this depth.

	- The client will repeat the movement for approximately five repetitions, while the fitness professional views them from both the anterior and lateral vantage points.

## Key Terms

**Overhead squat assessment  (OHSA)**
A movement assessment designed to assess dynamic posture, core stability, and neuromuscular control of the whole body during a squatting motion.

## Images

**Figure 12-5: aOHSA, starting position - anterior**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF05-01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 12-5: bOHSA, starting position - lateral**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF05-02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 12-6: aOHSA, movement - anterior**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF06-01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 12-6: bOHSA, movement - lateral**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF06-02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533