---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Observing Dynamic Posture
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
# Observing Dynamic Posture

Posture is often viewed as being static (without movement), but everyday posture is constantly changing to meet the demands placed on the body. Thus, once completing a static postural assessment, movement assessments (also known as dynamic postural assessments) should be performed.

The findings from the dynamic postural assessment should further reinforce the observations made during the static postural assessment. In addition, any issues not revealed during the static postural assessment may be observed during the dynamic postural observations and are often the quickest way to gain an overall impression of a client’s movement quality. Movement observations should relate to basic functions, such as squatting, balancing, pushing, and pulling. The observation process should search for any muscle imbalances or movement impairment patterns that may possibly lead to injury, both in and out of the fitness environment. With the limited time that most fitness professionals have for observation, incorporating a systematic assessment sequence is essential.

## HELPFUL HINT

The faulty postures identified during a static postural assessment will likely appear during a movement assessment, but the same cannot be said in the opposite direction. When standing at rest, a client could have observably perfect posture; however, when tasked to perform a movement assessment, they may suddenly reveal movement impairments.

Like a static postural assessment, movement assessments require observation of the client’s five kinetic chain checkpoints. Although abnormal movement may be noticed at a specific joint, the cause of that impairment may be coming from a lack of mobility or stability from an adjacent region.