---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Performance Assessments
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
This assessment is most applicable for those seeking to assess their maximal strength capabilities. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal strength testing.

**Bench Press Strength Assessment Position**

	- The client should lay on their back on a weight-lifting bench.

	- The low-back should be in a neutral position (avoid excessive arching).

	- Both feet should be firmly planted on the ground.

	- A comfortable weight should be used for the warm-up and initial repetitions of the testing.

	- The client will grasp the barbell with their hands slightly greater than shoulder-width apart.

	- Proper spotting by the Certified Personal Trainer is required during the testing.

**Bench Press Strength Assessment Movement**

	- The client, with assistance from the fitness professional, should unrack the weighted barbell, lower it to their chest, and press it back into full elbow extension. After completing three repetitions, the weight should then be re-racked.

	- The client should take a 2-minute rest.

	- Ten to twenty pounds (or 5% to 10% of initial load) should be added.

	- The client should repeat steps 1 through 3 until they are no longer comfortable adding weight or cannot complete a minimum of three repetitions.

	- The one-rep maximum estimation chart in Appendix A should be used to calculate one-repetition max.

	- The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to measure progress.

## Squat Strength Assessment

The **squat strength assessment** is designed to estimate maximal strength and the one-rep maximum for the squat exercise. This test is considered an advanced assessment for strength-specific goals and, as such, may not be suitable for all clients. Certified Personal Trainers should not perform this assessment for clients with general fitness or weight-loss goals, or those with limited experience performing resistance training. This assessment is most applicable for those seeking to assess their maximal strength capabilities. A proper warm-up is encouraged before beginning any maximal strength testing.

**Squat Strength Assessment Position**

	- The client should stand with their feet approximately shoulder-width apart. The knees should be in line with the toes, and the low-back should be in a neutral position (avoid excessive arching). For safety reasons, it is important to avoid knee valgus during the duration of this assessment.

	- A comfortable weight should be used for the warm-up and initial repetitions of the testing. Clients should lower themselves under the racked barbell, placing it on their shoulders and grasping the barbell with their hands. Proper spotting by the Certified Personal Trainer is required during the testing.

**Squat Strength Assessment Movement**

	- The client should unrack the weighted barbell and step away from the squat rack. The client should then lower into a squatting position and return to the starting position. After completing three repetitions, the weight should then be re-racked.

	- The client should take a 2-minute rest.

	- Thirty to 40 pounds (or 10% to 20% of initial load) should be added.

	- The client should repeat steps 1 through 3 until they are no longer comfortable adding weight or cannot complete a minimum of three repetitions.

	- The one-rep maximum estimation chart in Appendix A should be used to calculate the client’s one-repetition max.

	- The client should be reassessed at regularly scheduled intervals to measure progress.

## Key Terms

**Squat strength assessment**
A performance assessment designed to estimate the one-repetition maximum of the squat exercise.