---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Implementing the Fitness Assessment
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
### OVERWEIGHT AND OBESE CLIENTS

Prior to working with overweight and obese populations, a thorough preparticipation health screening must be completed. Also, note that overweight and obese clients show a large spectrum of abilities, from highly functional and strong to significantly limited in their movement quality and confidence. Fitness professionals should not make assumptions about anyone’s ability, but rather use the results from a systematic postural and movement assessment to help inform their approach. Standing postural assessments may be more challenging due to the amount of body mass that covers bony landmarks, but this will still be the first step in the assessment process. Next, an OHSA should be used to evaluate whole body movement and stability. If the overweight or obese client appears unstable or at risk of falling, a modified overhead squat with reduced range of motion can be used instead. If the overweight or obese client performs confidently and is stable in the overhead squat, a single-leg squat may be helpful to evaluate balance, but it is not necessary and depends on the fitness professional’s evaluation.

Performance assessments are also not necessary for many overweight or obese clients, as these clients are typically seeking to improve body composition and health measures, not athletic performance. Assessment considerations for overweight and obese clients include the following:

	- Ensure a thorough preparticipation health screening is completed.

	- Avoid making assumptions about the overweight or obese client’s ability, and instead, allow results from posture and movement screening to help determine their functional status.

	- Consider limiting movements that require an overweight or obese client to get on and off the ground.

Assessment modification options for overweight and obese clients include the following:

	- Consider modifying the overhead squat with a reduced squat depth.

	- Skip the single-leg squat for overweight and obese clients, unless they show adequate strength and stability during the OHSA.

	- Perform pushing and pulling assessments in a standing position or with the use of machines for improved stability and comfort.

### YOUTH CLIENTS

With increased use of technology and long hours seated in classroom environments, even youth clients will present with postural distortions. As a result, static postural assessments are recommended and should be performed before movement assessments. Overhead squat, single-leg squat, pushing, and pulling assessments should also be used to determine the client’s functional status and movement quality. In many cases, movement impairments for youth are the result of limited strength and poor motor control.

Youth clients can benefit from performance assessments, especially if the child plays sports. The most important things to consider, however, are the youth’s maturity level and goals. Is the youth seeking weight loss or improved athletic performance? This information will determine the most appropriate assessments to conduct. Note that one-repetition maximum tests (bench press and squat) would not be appropriate for most youth clients. Instead, select muscular endurance and cardiovascular assessments, unless measuring absolute strength is vitally important for the child’s goals and the child has the maturity level and exercise experience to handle such assessments.