---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Implementing the Fitness Assessment
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
Assessment considerations for youth include the following:

	- The OHSA should be used to begin learning about the youth client’s functional abilities and to determine if they are ready for the single-leg squat assessment.

	- Assumptions about the youth client’s ability should be avoided, and instead, results from postural and movement screenings should be used to help determine their functional status.

	- Youth clients should typically not be challenged with maximum strength testing due to their developmental stage of life and lack of maturity needed for such assessments.

	- Many movement impairments will be the result of a lack of strength or motor control in the youth populations.

Assessment modification options for youth include the following:

	- Implementation of muscular endurance assessments should be considered instead of maximum strength testing.

	- Performance assessments, such as the push-up test, LEFT, and pro shuttle assessment, may be a fun way to keep youth clients engaged, while also testing their muscular endurance, power, and agility.

### OLDER ADULT CLIENTS

Preparticipation health screening should be conducted for older adult clients prior to any other assessments. Once it is determined that the individual can safely proceed, the goal of the assessment process is to determine the older adult’s functional status. Some of the typical movement assessments may need to be modified for this population. After a static postural assessment, a modified OHSA (limited range of motion) may need to be administered. In many cases, a single-leg squat test is not safe for this population, unless the client displays remarkably good strength and stability during the OHSA. Upper-extremity pushing and pulling assessments should typically be performed in a standing position with light resistance from a cable pulley or seated in a machine. Performance assessments are typically not appropriate for older adult clients unless they are an athlete and have specific athletic goals. Assessment considerations for older adults include the following:

	- A thorough preparticipation health screening should be completed prior to further testing.

	- Assumptions about the older adult’s ability should be avoided, and instead, results from postural and movement screenings should be used to help determine their functional status.

	- Movements that require senior clients to get on and off the ground may need to be limited depending on the client’s functional status.

	- The assessment process should be started conservatively and then progress to more challenging movements based on the client’s goals and abilities.

Assessment modification options for older adults include the following:

	- The overhead squat may need to be modified with a reduced squat depth.

	- The single-leg squat for older adult clients should be skipped, unless they show exceptional strength and stability during the OHSA.

	- Pushing and pulling assessments should be performed in a standing position or with the use of machines for improved stability and comfort.