---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Static posture is typically assessed in standing position and is used to identify the three postural distortions: pes planus distortion syndrome, upper crossed syndrome, and lower crossed syndrome.

	- Pes planus distortion syndrome is characterized by flat feet, knee valgus, and internally rotated and adducted hips.

	- Lower crossed syndrome is characterized by an anterior pelvic tilt and excessive lordosis of the lumbar spine.

	- Upper crossed syndrome is characterized by a forward head and protracted shoulders.

	- The OHSA is the first movement assessment performed for clients and serves as the basis for all other movement assessments. It evaluates dynamic posture, core stability, and neuromuscular control of the whole body during a squatting motion.

	- During the OHSA, note all movement impairments to identify potential muscle imbalances. From the anterior view, look for feet turning out or knees caving in. From the lateral view, look for low-back arching, excessive forward lean of the torso, or arms falling forward.

	- The single-leg squat assessment should be used by clients who have performed well in the OHSA, or if the fitness professional is considering single-leg exercises in their programming. This test is a good assessment of an individual’s ability to balance, which is an important functional consideration for activities of daily living and exercise programming.

	- Pushing and pulling assessments evaluate function of the upper extremity and concurrent core stability. They can be used as an intake assessment or an integrated part of the actual programming.

	- When performing pushing or pulling assessments, look for the following movement impairments: low-back arching, shoulders elevating, or head jutting forward.

	- Performance assessments can be used for clients looking to improve athletic performance, and measure maximal strength, power, muscular endurance, and speed and agility.

	- The push-up test measures muscular endurance of the upper extremities during a pushing movement.

	- The bench press and squat strength assessments measure maximal strength capabilities. These tests are advanced assessments for strength-specific goals and may not be suitable for clients with limited experience with resistance training.

	- The vertical jump and long jump assessments measure lower-body power.

	- The LEFT is designed to test lateral speed and agility. It is considered an advanced assessment for speed and performance-specific goals.

	- The 40-yard dash assessment evaluates reaction capabilities, acceleration, and maximal sprinting speed.

	- The pro shuttle (5-10-5) test assesses acceleration, deceleration, agility, and control. This test is most appropriate for clients with athletic goals seeking to assess agility and sprinting speed.

	- All assessments need to be sequenced in a specific order to help guarantee accurate results. Non-fatiguing assessments, such as a preparticipation health screening and physiological and body composition assessments, should be conducted prior to postural, movement, cardio, and performance assessments.

	- Fitness professionals should always use caution when implementing movement and performance assessments with their clients. Certain populations, such as overweight or obese, youths, older adults, and prenatal clients, may need to modify or avoid certain movement and performance assessments. Some assessments are not applicable because they do not relate to the client’s goals. Other assessments may cause safety concerns.

**REFERENCES****

Barton, C. J., Lack, S., Malliaras, P., & Morrissey, D. (2013). Gluteal muscle activity and patellofemoral pain syndrome: A systematic review. *British Journal of Sports Medicine*, *47*(4), 207–214. https://doi.org/1136/bjsports-2012-090953

Bolgla, L. A., Malone, T. R., Umberger, B. R., & Uhl, T. L. (2008). Hip strength and hip and knee kinematics during stair descent in females with and without patellofemoral pain syndrome. *Journal* *of Orthopedic and Sports Physical Therapy*, *38*(1), 12–18. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.2462

Cichanowski, H. R., Schmitt, J. S., Johnson, R. J., & Niemuth, P. E. (2007). Hip strength in collegiate female athletes with patellofemoral pain. *Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise*, *39*(8), 1127–1132. https://doi.org/10.1249/mss.0b013e3180601109

Crossley, K. M., Zhang, W. J., Schache, A. G., Bryant, A., & Cowan, S. M. (2011). Performance on the single-leg squat task indicates hip abductor muscle function. *American Journal of Sports Medicine*, *39*(4), 866–873. https://doi.org/10.1177/0363546510395456

Eckard, T., Padua, D., Mauntel, T., Frank, B., Pietrosimone, L., Begalle, R.,... Kucera, K. (2018). Association between double-leg squat and single-leg squat performance and injury incidence among incoming NCAA Division I athletes: A prospective cohort study. *Physical Therapy in Sport*, *34*, 192–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ptsp.2018.10.009

Fenwick, C. M., Brown, S. H., & McGill, S. M. (2009). Comparison of different rowing exercises: Trunk muscle activation and lumbar spine motion, load, and stiffness. *Journal of Strength and* *Conditioning Research*, *23*(5), 1408–1417. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181942019

Fielitz, L. R., Coelho, J., Horne, T., & Brechue, W. (2016). Inter-rater reliability and intra-rater reliability of assessing the 2-minute push-up test. *Military Medicine*, *181*(2), 167–172. https://doi.org/10.7205/milmed-d-14-00533

Garrick, L. E., Alexander, B. C., Schache, A. G., Pandy, M. G., Crossley, K. M., & Collins, N. J. (2018). Athletes rated as poor single-leg squat performers display measurable differences in single-leg squat biomechanics compared with good performers. *Journal of* *Sport Rehabilitation*, *27*(6), 546–553. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsr.2016-0208

Gupta, N., Christiansen, C. S., Hallman, D. M., Korshøj, M., Carneiro, I.G., & Holtermann, A. (2015). Is objectively measured sitting time associated with low back pain? A cross-sectional investigation in the NOMAD study. *PLoS One*, *10*(3), e0121159. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0121159

Harris-Hayes, M., Steger-May, K., Koh, C., Royer, N. K., Graci, V., & Salsich, G. B. (2014). Classification of lower extremity movement patterns based on visual assessment: Reliability and correlation with 2-dimensional video analysis. *Journal of Athletic Training*, *49*(3), 304–310. https://doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-49.2.21

Janda, V. (2002). Muscles and motor control in cervicogenic disorders. In: Grant, R. (Ed.), *Physical therapy of the cervical and thoracic* *spine *(3rd ed., pp. 182–199). St. Louis, MO: Churchill Livingstone.

Mauntel, T. C., Begalle, R. L., Cram, T. R., Frank, B. S., Hirth, C. J., Blackburn, T., & Padua, D. A. (2013). The effects of lower extremity muscle activation and passive range of motion on single leg squat performance. *Journal of Strength and Conditioning* *Research*, *27*(7), 1813–1823. https://doi.org/10.1519/jsc.0b013e318276b886

Mersmann, F., Bohm, S., & Arampatzis, A. (2017). Imbalances in the development of muscle and tendon as risk factor for tendinopathies in youth athletes: A review of current evidence and concepts of prevention. *Frontiers in Physiology*, *8*, 987. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2017.00987

Nakagawa, T. H., Moriya, É. T., Maciel, C. D., & Serrão, A. F. (2012a). Frontal plane biomechanics in males and females with and without patellofemoral pain. *Medicine and Science in Sports and* *Exercise*, *44*(9), 1747–1755. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e318256903a

Nakagawa, T. H., Moriya, É. T., Maciel, C. D., & Serrao, F. V. (2012b). Trunk, pelvis, hip, and knee kinematics, hip strength, and gluteal muscle activation during a single-leg squat in males and females with and without patellofemoral pain syndrome. *Journal of* *Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy*, *46*(2), 491–501. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.3987

Padua, D. A., Bell, D. R., & Clark, M. A. (2012). Neuromuscular characteristics of individuals displaying excessive medial knee displacement. *Journal of Athletic Training*, *47*(5), 525–536. https://doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-47.5.10

Padua, D. A., Distefano, L. J., Hewett, T. E., Garrett, W. E., Marshall, S. W., Golden, G. M.,... Sigward, S. M. (2018). National Athletic Trainers Association position statement: Prevention of anterior cruciate ligament injury. *Journal of Athletic Training*, *53*(1), 5–19. https://doi.org/10.4085/1062-6050-99-16

Page, P., Frank, C. C., & Lardner, R. (2010). *Assessment and treatment of muscle imbalance: The Janda approach*. Champaign, IL: Human* *Kinetics.

Park, S.-M., Kim, H.-J., Jeong, H., Kim, H., Chang, B.-S., Lee, C.-K., & Yeom, J. S. (2018). Longer sitting time and low physical activity are closely associated with chronic low back pain in population over 50 years of age: A cross-sectional study using the sixth Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. *Spine* *Journal*, *18*(11), 2051–2058. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2018.04.003

Post, E. G., Olson, M., Trigsted, S., Hetzel, S., & Bell, D. R. (2017). The reliability and discriminative ability of the overhead squat test for observational screening of medial knee displacement. *Journal of Sport Rehabilitation*, *26*(1), 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsr.2015-0178

Powers, C. M. (2010). The influence of abnormal hip mechanics on knee injury: A biomechanical perspective. *Journal of Orthopaedic* *and Sports Physical Therapy*, *40*(2), 42–51. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2010.3337

Rabin, A., & Kozol, Z. (2017). Utility of the overhead squat and forward arm squat in screening for limited ankle dorsiflexion. *Journal of* *Strength and Conditioning Research*, *31*(5), 1251–1258. https://doi.org/10.1519/jsc.0000000000001580

Santos Bunn, P., de Paula Silva, G., & de Silva, E. B. (2018). Performance in the deep squat test and musculoskeletal injuries: A systematic review. *Fisioterapia em Movimento*, *31*, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1590/1980-5918.031.ao26

Souza, R. B., & Powers, C. M. (2009). Differences in hip kinematics, muscle strength, and muscle activation between subjects with and without patellofemoral pain. *Journal of Orthopedic and* *Sports Physical Therapy*, *39*(1), 12–19. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2009.2885

Sueki, D. G., Cleland, J. A., & Wainner, R. S. (2013). A regional interdependence model of musculoskeletal dysfunction: Research, mechanisms, and clinical implications. *Journal of Manual and* *Manipulative Therapy*, *21*(2), 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1179/2042618612Y.0000000