---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 12
chapter_title: Posture, Movement, and Performance Assessments
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Observing Dynamic Posture
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
When performing the OHSA, record all findings (**Table 12-4**) and then refer to **Table 12-5 **(on the following page) to determine potential overactive and underactive muscles that will need to be addressed through flexibility and strengthening techniques. Overactive muscles require stretching, whereas underactive muscles require additional strengthening to help correct the muscle imbalance.

**TABLE 12-4 OHSA Observational Findings Sheet**

| View | Kinetic Chain Checkpoint | Movement Impairment | Result |
|---|---|---|---|
| Anterior | Feet/Ankles | ❑ Turn out | ❑ Yes ❑ No |
| Knees | ❑ Valgus (knock knees) | ❑ Yes ❑ No |
| Lateral | LPHC | ❑ Forward lean of trunk | ❑ Yes ❑ No |
| LPHC | ❑ Low-back arches | ❑ Yes ❑ No |
| Shoulders | ❑ Arms fall forward | ❑ Yes ❑ No |

# CRITICAL

The purpose of the OHSA is to observe a client’s movement patterns and identify movement impairments. These impairments indicate potential muscle imbalances. To correct each muscle imbalance, it is important to stretch the identified overactive muscles and strengthen the identified underactive muscles.

The overhead squat provides valuable information for the fitness professional to program mobility and strengthening exercises that are tailored to the client’s needs. This is the main reason the OHSA is recommended to screen a majority of clients during the first session and then periodically to monitor progress. Poor performance on this assessment can be discouraging for a new client, so fitness professionals should remember to keep a positive approach to explaining the benefits of addressing the various movement impairments a client may display. This assessment also provides the foundation for other assessments. The next lower-extremity assessment is the single-leg squat assessment, which is also a good test for balance.

## Images

**Figure 12-10: Low-back arches**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF10.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 12-11: Arms fall forward**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH12_FIGF11.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533