---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Introduction to Integrated Training Concepts
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Integrated Training Concepts

Recall that integrated training combines many forms of exercises into one program. Clients may be familiar with these forms of exercise, but not necessarily when used in a systematic fashion. However, integrated training can have a profound impact on a client’s health, fitness, and athletic performance. This approach is ever changing and provides a systematic and progressive framework, but only if the training is implemented correctly. The next few sections will provide a brief overview of specific components of integrated training.

## Flexibility Training

Flexibility training increases joint ROM (Junior et al., 2017). In other words, flexibility training involves different types of stretching techniques to improve tissue extensibility, which allows the body to move freely without being hindered.

The National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM) recommends using a variety of stretching options in a systematic fashion to elicit optimal results. These stretching techniques include self-myofascial techniques, such as foam rolling, static stretching, active stretching, and dynamic stretching. Refer to **Table 13-2** for more information regarding the benefits of flexibility training.

**TABLE 13-2 Benefits of Flexibility Training**

| Increased joint ROM
	Possible decrease in muscle soreness
	Potential for a reduction in injury risk |
|---|

^*Source*: Behm et al., 2016.^

## Cardiorespiratory Training

The number one cause of death around the world is heart disease (World Health Organization, 2018). To combat this issue, cardiorespiratory training is a cornerstone of improvement for heart and lung functionality (Conraads et al., 2015). Cardiorespiratory training refers to the capacity of respiratory and cardiovascular systems to provide muscles with oxygen during sustained and/or intense exercise (Lin et al., 2015). Typical forms of cardiorespiratory exercise include walking, jogging, running, cycling, biking, swimming, rowing, and sports competition. In most cases, cardiorespiratory training is a critical component of an integrated training program. However, the mode, duration, and intensity of cardiorespiratory exercise will be dependent on the client’s health, wellness, and performance goals. Refer to **Table 13-3** for benefits regarding cardiorespiratory training.

**TABLE 13-3 Benefits of Cardiorespiratory Training**

| Decreased resting heart rate and blood pressure
	Increased stroke volume and cardiac output
	Improved gas exchange, decreased airway resistance, and improved oxygen uptake
	Decreased blood flow resistance and increased blood volume
	Improved blood lipid profile/chemistry
	Improved blood flow back to the heart via veins |
|---|

^Modified from Anderson, et al., 2016; Garber et al., 2011.^