---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Introduction to Integrated Training Concepts
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Core Training

The core musculature includes those of the trunk and pelvis that are responsible for spinal and pelvic stability. These muscles also generate or transfer energy from the core to the extremities. Core stability is the ability to control the position and motion of the trunk over the pelvis and legs for optimal production, transfer, and control of force and motion (Manchado et al., 2017). Exercises aimed at enhancing functionality of the core musculature and core stability are considered part of core training.

Core training is sometimes misconstrued and only associated with the anterior abdominal region of the body, such as the rectus abdominis (i.e., six-pack muscle). In other words, individuals may believe crunches and sit-ups are lone core exercises. Fortunately, many movements can be completed using a variety of exercises that work all three different planes of motion as well as many muscle groups, including the obliques, low-back, and gluteal complex. Refer to **Table** **13-4** for benefits regarding core training.

**TABLE 13-4 Benefits of Core Training**

| Enhanced posture and spinal health
	Better bodily function for activities of daily living and on-the-job movements
	Increased balance, stabilization, and coordination of the kinetic chain
	Minimized or resolved low-back pain conditions or symptoms
	Improved skill-related movements and power (i.e., swinging a racket or golf club) |
|---|

^Modified from Granacher et al., 2013; Huxel Bliven & Anderson, 2013; Wang & Chen, 2014.^

## Balance Training

Balance is the ability of a person to maintain, achieve, or restore a specific state of balance without falling (Callesen et al., 2018). Balance training is a method that can create better movement patterns for all clients and reduce the occurrence of falls in the elderly (Gschwind et al., 2013) and ankle sprains for athletes (Bellows & Wong, 2018; McGuine & Keene, 2006). Balance training is used for improving postural control by challenging the alignment of the body’s center of gravity with regard to the base of support (Lesinski et al., 2015).

The more control the body is able to maintain, the more opportunities abound to incorporate more challenging movements into most exercise sessions. This holds true for any age of a client, and while it does benefit the elderly immensely, it should not be diminished in those who are considered younger (Okubo et al., 2017).