---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Flexibility Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Flexibility Training

Once fitness assessments are completed and all the information has been processed, the fitness professional can now design the client’s exercise program. The first step should be designing the client’s flexibility portion of the exercise program. Clients often require some type of flexibility training, which can be applied to the program’s warm-up and cool-down. This chapter focuses on foundational concepts of flexibility and how to apply various flexibility techniques with clients.

## What Is Flexibility?

**Flexibility** is defined as the normal **extensibility** (ability to stretch) of all soft tissues (e.g., contractile and noncontractile) that allow the complete **range of motion (ROM)** of a joint. Joint ROM is dictated by the type of joint (e.g., ball-and-socket versus hinge joint), and the extensibility of muscles and surrounding soft tissues (Floyd, 2018). An important characteristic of soft tissue is that it will only achieve efficient extensibility if optimal bodily control is maintained throughout the entire joint ROM, which is often termed **mobility** (flexibility + joint ROM; Neumann, 2017). Flexibility has a major influence on mobility during dynamic motion.

## Key Terms

**Flexibility**
The normal extensibility of soft tissues that allows for full range of motion of a joint.

**Extensibility**
Capability to be elongated or stretched.

**Range of motion (ROM)**
The degree to which specific joints or body segments can move; often measured in degrees.

**Mobility**
Optimal flexibility and joint range of motion; ability to move freely.