---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Static Stretching
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

**Does Static Stretching Impair Strength and Power?**

There has been much debate in the research and sport science communities regarding the effects of static stretching on strength and athletic performance. Several studies have cited that static stretching impairs strength and power and recommend avoiding this technique prior to exercise or sport competition (Haddad et al., 2014).

Looking at the research more closely, static stretching, when performed acutely and in isolation, can temporarily impair muscular power due to its relaxation response. This is especially true when stretches are held for extended periods (2 minutes or longer) and performed in an acute fashion (every now and again) and are the only form of exercise performed prior to maximal effort (sprinting or jumping).

However, static stretches, when performed for 30 seconds or less in a chronic fashion (included prior to every workout) and followed by dynamic activities, does not impair athletic performance (Behm et al., 2016; Kay & Blazevich, 2012; Reid et al., 2018).

As such, NASM recommends performing static stretching, especially when individuals exhibit limited joint ROM or muscle imbalances. Following are some recommendations.

Static stretches:

	- Should be held for 30 seconds

	- Only used on muscles identified as overactive during the assessment process

	- Followed by additional warm-up protocols, such as low-intensity core and balance exercises or dynamic stretching, to regain motor neuron excitability

## Static Stretches

### Static Gastrocnemius Stretch

#### TECHNIQUE

Stand in a lunge position with both feet pointing straight forward. Make sure to keep the rear foot flat on the ground. Do not let the heel rise. Shift weight forward until a stretch is felt in the rear calf muscle.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_UNNUN15.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_el3_flex_static_gastrocnmeius_stretch.jpeg