---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Human Movement System Review
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
For example, when performing a lat pulldown exercise, the latissimus dorsi (agonist) must be able to concentrically accelerate shoulder extension, adduction, and internal rotation, while the rhomboids (synergists) perform downward rotation of the scapulae (shoulder blades). At the same time, the rotator cuff musculature (stabilizers) must dynamically stabilize the glenohumeral (shoulder) joint throughout the motion. If these muscles collectively do not work efficiently together (force-couples), compensations may ensue, leading to muscle imbalances, altered joint motion, and possible injury. To allow for optimal neuromuscular efficiency, individuals must have proper flexibility in all three planes of motion. This allows for the freedom of movement needed to perform everyday activities effectively, such as bending over to tie shoes or reaching in the top cupboard for dishes.

It is important to note that the nervous system is the controlling factor behind this principle, and specific mechanoreceptors (or sensory receptors) located in the muscles and tendons— specifically the muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organ—help determine muscle balance or imbalance.

### MUSCLE SPINDLES

The **muscle spindle** is a major sensory organ of the muscle and is composed of microscopic fibers that lie parallel to the muscle fiber. When a muscle is stretched, the muscle spindle records the change in muscle length and speed (rate) of length change and sends this information to the **central nervous system (CNS)** (Floyd, 2018). The function of the muscle spindle is to help prevent the muscle from stretching too far or too fast. This reaction is called the **stretch reflex** (**Figure 14-9**). Thus, the more sudden the change in muscle length, the stronger the stretch reflex or muscle contraction. The muscle spindle helps maintain muscle tone and protects the body from injury (Kenney et al., 2019).

## Key Terms

**Muscle spindle**
Sensory receptors sensitive to change in length of the muscle and the rate of that change.

**Central nervous system**
A division of the nervous system that includes the brain and spinal cord.

**Stretch reflex**
Neurological signal from the muscle spindle that causes a muscle to contract to prevent excessive lengthening.

## Images

**Figure 14-9: Stretch reflex**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF09.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533