---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 8
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

Flexibility training is an important exercise mode to help reduce the risk of muscle imbalances, joint dysfunctions, and overuse injuries. It is important to have proper flexibility, joint ROM, and neuromuscular efficiency in all three planes of motion (sagittal, frontal, transverse), which can be achieved by implementing an integrated approach toward flexibility training. All segments of the kinetic chain must be properly aligned to avoid postural distortion patterns and tissue overload. The adaptive potential of the human body is decreased by limited flexibility, which forces the body to move in an altered fashion, known as relative flexibility. Muscle imbalances result from altered reciprocal inhibition, synergistic dominance, and osteo- and arthrokinematic dysfunction. These imbalances can be caused by poor posture, poor training technique, or previous injury. These muscle imbalances result in decreased bodily control and possibly injury.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

Flexibility training is an important part of a comprehensive fitness program for clients. Clients who participate in tasks that result in pattern overload are at risk for cumulative injury.

These clients may need flexibility training to correct muscle imbalances, increase joint ROM, improve the extensibility of muscles, and improve neuromuscular efficiency. There are many forms of flexibility training, including self-myofascial techniques, static stretching, active stretching, and dynamic stretching.

Self-myofascial rolling uses a foam roller to help relax tissues. Other self-myofascial techniques may use massage balls or other devices to massage tissues. These techniques help reduce soreness and improve joint ROM. It is recommended to perform self-myofascial techniques prior to other forms of stretching.

The fitness professional should be aware of common medical precautions and contraindications to prescribe safe self-myofascial techniques for clients of all levels.

Static stretching involves stretching a muscle to the first point of tension and holding that position for at least 30 seconds. This form of stretching increases joint ROM. It is important to only statically stretch muscles that have been identified as overactive during the assessment process.

Active stretching uses reciprocal inhibition to increase joint ROM and tissue extensibility. Active stretches are held for 1 to 2 seconds and repeated for 5 to 10 repetitions.

Lastly, dynamic stretching uses the force production of a muscle and the body’s momentum to take a joint through the full available ROM. Clients can perform one set of 10 repetitions using 3 to 10 dynamic stretches.