---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Flexibility Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
There are various factors that can influence flexibility, which include but are not limited to the following:

	- Genetics

	- **Myofascial** (connective) tissue elasticity

	- Composition of tendons or skin surrounding the joint

	- Joint structure

	- Strength of opposing muscle groups

	- Body composition

	- Sex

	- Age

	- Activity level

	- Previous injuries or existing medical issues

	- Repetitive movements (Blazevich et al., 2012; Opar et al., 2012)

Poor flexibility can lead to the development of **relative flexibility** (altered movement patterns), which is the process in which the **human movement system (HMS)** seeks the path of least resistance during functional movements (Mills et al., 2015; Morais & Cruz, 2016). A prime example of relative flexibility is seen in people who squat with their feet excessively externally rotated (**Figure 14-1**) because individuals may have limited ankle ROM that prevents adequate ankle dorsiflexion to perform a squat with proper mechanics (Rabin & Kozol, 2017). By widening the stance and externally rotating the feet, the amount of dorsiflexion required at the ankle to perform a squatting pattern is decreased. A second example can be seen when people perform an overhead shoulder press with excessive lumbar extension (arched low-back) (**Figure 14-2**). Individuals who possess limited latissimus dorsi extensibility will have decreased sagittal-plane shoulder flexion (inability to lift arms directly overhead), and as a result, they compensate for this lack of shoulder ROM by extending the lumbar spine to allow them to press the load completely above their head (Monteiro et al., 2017). Relative flexibility can also prevent the nervous system from efficiently recruiting the correct muscle patterns and contractions during the movement (Floyd, 2018).

## Key Terms

**Myofascial**
The body’s connective tissue that includes muscles and fascia.

**Relative flexibility**
The process in which the body seeks the path of least resistance during functional movements.

**Human movement system (HMS)**
The collective components and structures that work together to move the body: muscular, skeletal, and nervous systems.

## Images

**Figure 14-1: Squat with externally rotated feet**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 14-2: Overhead shoulder press with lumbar extension**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533