---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Human Movement System Review
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### OSTEOKINEMATIC AND ARTHROKINEMATIC DYSFUNCTION

Osteokinematics describes how the bones and joints are moving through a ROM. In other words, osteokinematics refers to joint motions we can see, such as flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, or rotation of body segments (Neumann, 2017) (**Figure 14-7**). Arthrokinematics describes the motion at the joint surfaces. There are three major arthrokinematic joint motions: roll, slide or glide, and spin (Neumann, 2017) (**Figure 14-8**). Refer to Chapter 5 for a review of these joint motions.

Altered joint motion can be caused by **altered length-tension relationships**, force-couple relationships, and poor joint surface motion, which results in poor movement efficiency. To achieve efficient motion through a joint’s ROM (osteokinematic), there must be good motion at the joint surface (arthrokinematics) and soft tissue flexibility. For example, a client performs a single-leg squat exercise and demonstrates an excessive knee valgus (knee moves inward) position during the eccentric phase of the movement. The client’s knee joint is mispositioned, preventing the joint surface from moving efficiently. This results in decreased knee joint ROM, excessive biomechanical stress, potential muscle imbalances, and possible compensations at the hip or ankle as the client attempts to successfully perform the movement. Poor form on exercises can be a risk factor for injury (Dill et al., 2014; Slater & Hart, 2016).

### POOR NEUROMUSCULAR EFFICIENCY

**Neuromuscular efficiency** is the ability of the nervous system to recruit the correct muscles to produce force, reduce force, and dynamically stabilize the body’s structure in all three planes of motion (Arãgao et al., 2015; David et al., 2008).

## Key Terms

**Altered length-tension relationship**
When a muscle’s resting length is too short or too long, reducing the amount of force it can produce.

**Neuromuscular efficiency**
The ability of the nervous system to recruit the correct muscles to produce force, reduce force, and dynamically stabilize the body’s structure in all three planes of motion.

## Images

**Figure 14-7: Examples of osteokinematic movements**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 14-8: Examples of arthrokinematic movement**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533