---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
- Adults should accumulate 2 hours and 30 minutes (150 minutes) of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., brisk walking) every week or 1 hour and 15 minutes (75 minutes) of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., jogging or running) every week, or an equivalent mix of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity.

	- Type refers to the mode of activity selected, such as cycling, running, or swimming.

	- Enjoyment refers to the amount of pleasure derived from engaging in a specific exercise or activity.

	- Volume of exercise represents the total amount of work performed in each timeframe, typically 1 week.

	- Progression refers to how an exercise program advances.

	- Each exercise training session should also include a warm-up phase, conditioning phase, and cool-down phase.

	- Stage 1 is designed to help improve cardiorespiratory fitness levels in apparently healthy sedentary clients using a target intensity below ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1) and involves steady-state aerobic exercise.

	- A stage 2 workout consists of a mix of recovery intervals just below VT1 and work intervals performed at an intensity just above VT1.

	- Once clients become accustomed to stage 2 intervals and have shown positive signs of adapting to the physical demands, they can begin performing moderately intense steady-state cardio exercise just above VT1, if desired.

	- A stage 3 workout includes the client moving in and out of training zones 1, 2, and 3.

	- A stage 4 workout involves interval training integrating all four training zones.

	- Stage 5 focuses on drills that help improve conditioning using linear, multidirectional, and sport-specific activities performed as conditioning and often combines high-intensity interval training with small-sided games and agility drills.

	- Common postural deviations that clients may exhibit while engaging in cardiorespiratory training include round shoulders and forward head, an anterior pelvic tilt, or adducted and internally rotated knees and pronated feet.

	- Care should be taken to monitor a client’s posture during cardiorespiratory exercise.