---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Components of Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### FLEXIBILITY TRAINING DURING A COOL-DOWN PERIOD

Flexibility training should also be included in the cool-down period. Flexibility training, includ­ing self-myofascial techniques and static stretching, has been shown to be effective at managing muscle soreness and promoting optimal joint range of motion (Hooren & Peake, 2018).

Initially, fitness professionals should closely monitor new clients during both the warm-up and the cool-down periods to make certain that the activities being performed are appropriate, safe, and effective. It is also important for the client to understand the importance of both the warm-up and the cool-down periods. **Table 15-9 **provides example cool-down activities.

**TABLE 15-9 Example Cool-Down Activities**

| Components | Examples | Time |
|---|---|---|
| Cardiorespiratory exercise | Treadmill | 5–10 minutes (gradually reduce speed) |
| Self-myofascial techniques | Calves

Hip flexors

Latissimus dorsi | 30 seconds for each muscle |
| Static stretching | Calves

Hip flexors

Latissimus dorsi | 30 seconds for each muscle |

#### TRAINING TIP

Regardless of the goal, always begin an exercise program with posture and movement assessments, such as the overhead squat, pushing, pulling, and single-leg squat tests (discussed in Chapter 12). These assessments help determine the muscles that need to be stretched during a warm-up. If a muscle is overactive, it may be impeding or altering proper movement and as such needs to be corrected to enhance movement.

	- When used in a warm-up, stretching techniques should only be used on areas that the assessments have determined are overactive.

	- During the cool-down, self-myofascial techniques and static stretching should be used to return muscles to normal resting lengths. Clients should focus on identified overactive muscles and/or the major muscles used during the workout.