---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: General Guidelines for Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
#### TALK TEST

Historically, the **talk test** has been an informal method used to gauge exercise training intensity during exercise. The belief has always been that if clients reach a point at which they are not able to carry on a simple conversation during exercise because they are breathing too hard, then they are probably exercising at a high-intensity level. Several studies have now confirmed that there is a correlation between the talk test, VO~2~, **ventilatory threshold (T~vent~)**, and heart rate during both cycle ergometer and treadmill exercise (Foster et al., 2008; Jeans et al., 2011; Persinger et al., 2004; Reed & Pipe, 2016). Thus, it appears that the talk test can help fitness professionals and clients monitor proper exercise intensity without having to rely on measuring heart rate or VO~2max~.

When clients can speak comfortably, they are typically exercising below the intensity of **ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1)**. At the first point where clients can no longer speak comfortably during continuous speech (i.e., continuous talking becomes challenging), this intensity approximates VT1. This relationship between the talk test and VT1 has been demonstrated to be valid in several populations ranging from well-trained athletes to sedentary individuals and patients with cardiovascular disease (Voelker et al., 2001; Zanettini et al., 2013). The protocol for measuring VT1 is described in Chapter 11.

A summary of methods for programming cardiorespiratory exercise intensity is illustrated in **Table 15-4**.

**TABLE 15-4 Methods for Programming Exercise Intensity**

| Method | Description |
|---|---|
| VO2max | Target VO2max = VO2max × % intensity desired |
| Maximal heart rate (HRmax) | Tanaka HRmax formula: 208 – (0.7 × age)

Target heart rate = HRmax × % intensity desired |
| Heart rate reserve (HRR) | Target heart rate = [(HRmax – HRrest) × % intensity desired] + HRrest |
| Metabolic equivalent (MET) | One metabolic equivalent is equal to 3.5 mL O2 · kg–1 · min–1 or the equivalent of the average resting metabolic rate for adults |
| Ratings of perceived exertion (RPE) | 1 to 10 scale or 6- to 20-point scale |
| Talk test | The ability to speak during activity can identify exercise intensity and ventilatory threshold |

## Time

**Time** refers to the length of time engaged in an activity or exercise training session and is typically expressed in minutes. According to the most current public health guidelines on physical activity, adults should accumulate 2 hours and 30 minutes (150 minutes) of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., brisk walking) every week or 1 hour and 15 minutes (75 minutes) of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., jogging or running) every week, or an equivalent mix of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (Piercy et al., 2018; World Health Organization, 2015). The guidelines also recommend that if adults exceed 300 minutes per week of moderate-intensity activity or 150 minutes per week of vigorous-intensity activity, then they will gain even more health and fitness benefits. However, it is also important for fitness professionals to appreciate that any duration of physical activity or exercise, regardless of the individual or accumulated time, can provide some positive health benefits.

## Key Terms

**Talk test**
An aerobic test that measures the participant’s ability to talk or hold a conversation during an activity at various intensity levels.

**Ventilatory threshold (Tvent)**
The point during graded exercise in which ventilation increases disproportionately to oxygen uptake, signifying a switch from predominately aerobic energy production to anaerobic energy production.

**Ventilatory threshold 1 (VT1)**
The point at which the body uses an equal mix of carbohydrate and fat as fuel sources.

**Time**
The duration an individual is engaged in a given activity.