---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: General Guidelines for Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Consider the following example of a 25-year-old client with a desired training intensity of 85% of his HR~max~. If this 25-year-old client has a resting heart rate of 50 bpm (which is considered very good), then the formula (using the Tanaka formula to determine HR~max~) would be solved as follows:

[(HR~max~ – HR~rest~) × desired intensity] + HR~rest~ = Target heart rate

                                        208 – (0.7 × 25) = 191 HR~max~

            191 (HR~max~) – 50 (HR~rest~) = 141

   141 × 85% (desired intensity) = 120

                                   120 + 50 (HR~rest~) = 170 bpm

Thus, 170 beats per minute is the client’s target heart rate.

#### METABOLIC EQUIVALENT

One MET is equal to 3.5 milliliters of oxygen consumed per kilogram of body weight per minute (3.5 mL O~2~ · kg^–1^ · min^–1^) or the equivalent of the average resting metabolic rate for adults. In other words, this represents the amount of oxygen used by an individual at true rest. METs are used to describe the energy cost of physical activity as multiples of resting metabolic rate. MET values are used to relate exercise intensity with energy expenditure. For example, a physical activity with a MET value of 4, such as jogging at a slow pace, requires four times the energy than a person uses at rest (e.g., sitting quietly). There are many resources available for fitness professionals that describe common activities and their average MET values. However, this method is an uncommon practice within a fitness facility.

#### RATINGS OF PERCEIVED EXERTION METHOD

RPE is a popular method for estimating exercise intensity. RPE is a technique used to validate how hard a client feels they are working during exercise. When using the RPE method, a person is subjectively rating the perceived difficulty of exercise and is based on the physical sensations, such as increased heart rate, increased respiration rate, increased sweating, and muscle fatigue. The client’s subjective rating should be reported based on the overall feelings of how hard they are working, including an overall sense of fatigue, and not just isolated areas of the body (i.e., tired legs during cycling). Although the RPE scale is a subjective measure, if clients report their exertion ratings accurately, RPE does provide a good estimate of exercise training intensity.

There are two versions of RPE: the original 6 to 20 scale and the newer 1 to 10 scale (**Tables 15-2** and **15-3**). The Borg 6 to 20 is the standard, yet it can be somewhat confusing because it starts at a score of 6 (rather than zero) and has 15 different choices. The reason behind the 6 to 20 scale is that each value corresponds to a heart rate, and most adult heart rates range between 60 bpm and 200 bpm. Subsequently, a Borg score of 6 corresponds to a heart rate of 60 bpm, whereas a Borg score of 12 corresponds to a heart rate of 120 bpm. However, for simplicity and ease of use, the National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM) recommends fitness professionals use the 1 to 10 scale with their clients, unless their clients are familiar with the 6 to 20 Borg scale.

**TABLE 15-2 RPE Scale, 6–20**

| Original Scale |
|---|
| 6 |  |
| 7 | Very, very light |
| 8 |  |
| 9 | Very light |
| 10 |  |
| 11 | Fairly light |
| 12 |  |
| 13 | Somewhat hard |
| 14 |  |
| 15 | Hard |
| 16 |  |
| 17 | Very hard |
| 18 |  |
| 19 | Very, very hard |
| 20 |  |

**TABLE 15-3 RPE Scale, 1–10**

| Rating | Perceived Exertion Level |
|---|---|
| 0 | No exertion, at rest |
| 1 | Very light |
| 2-3 | Light |
| 4-5 | Moderate, somewhat hard |
| 6-7 | High, vigorous |
| 8-9 | Very hard |
| 10 | Maximum effort, highest possible |