---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: General Guidelines for Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
However, 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity may only provide modest weight loss. Individuals who are seeking to lose weight will likely achieve greater benefits from the inclusion of more than 250 minutes of aerobic exercise per week (Donnelly et al., 2009). Research also reveals that for general health improvements and the prevention of weight gain, individuals should aim to expend 1,200 to 2,000 calories through physical activity per week (Donnelly et al., 2009).

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Because it is very difficult to expend 1,200 calories or more per week through structured exercise, experts suggest including nonstructured physical activity into one’s daily routine. Recent research has demonstrated that expending calories throughout the day through unstructured physical activity is important for health and weight loss efforts (Levine, 2007; Villablanca et al., 2015). This has shifted some attention away from structured, planned exercise a few times per week as a standalone to including **nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT)**. NEAT represents all the energy expended throughout the day that does not include eating, sleeping, or structured exercise (Levine, 2007; Villablanca et al., 2015). This energy includes calories expended through fidgeting, standing and moving around, and performing basic tasks of daily living (e.g., chores, grooming) and most often represents a greater quantity of expended calories in a day than what is accumulated through a single exercise session.

## Progression

**Progression **refers to how an exercise program advances. Exercise protocols should gradually progress in intensity and/or volume to continually challenge the individual. However, the rate of progression should be specific to the individual and their needs, goals, and abilities. The client’s health status, physical abilities, and responses to exercises must be considered. For example, progression for a 21-year-old elite athlete will differ from a 65-year-old sedentary adult.

A gradual increase of exercise volume (<10% per week) appears to be a safe protocol for most apparently healthy adults. This approach may also increase adherence to the exercise pro­gram because the exerciser feels competent to perform the work and complete the program.

Fitness professionals must be careful and plan cardiorespiratory training programs accord­ing to their client’s ability level. Risk of musculoskeletal injury (e.g., sprains, strains) can occur if intensity of exercise is progressed too quickly (Garber et al., 2011).

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

If a client is exercising for 150 minutes per week (30 minutes, 5 days per week), then a 10% increase in volume would be:

                                                             150 X 10% = 15

  150 + 15 = 165 minutes per week

## Key Terms

**Nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT)**
Energy expenditure through daily activities outside of structured exercise, such as walking, completing household chores, and taking the stairs.

**Progression**
The way an exercise program advances in intensity and/or volume to continually challenge the individual.