---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: General Guidelines for Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
However, accurately measuring VO~2max~ is oftentimes impractical for fitness professionals because it requires clients to perform cardiorespiratory exercise at maximal effort and sophisticated equipment to monitor the client’s ventilation response (oxygen consumed and carbon dioxide expired). Thus, submax­imal aerobic tests have become popular for fitness professionals to estimate VO~2max~.

#### MAXIMAL HEART RATE

Calculating HR~max~ is another method for establishing training intensity during cardiorespiratory exercise. Although measuring a client’s actual maximal heart rate is effective, it is also impractical for fitness professionals because it requires testing clients at maximal capacity. Subsequently, many mathematical formulas that estimate HR~max~ have been developed. Once HR~max~ is calculated, fitness professionals can have clients exercise at a certain percentage of their HR~max~.

Arguably the most commonly used formula for estimating HR~max~ is 220 – age. However, this formula was never intended to be used as an instrument for designing cardiorespiratory fitness programs because maximal heart rate varies significantly among individuals of the same age. Dr. William Haskell (one of the developers of the aforementioned formula) has been quoted as saying, “The formula was never supposed to be an absolute guide to rule people’s training” (Kolata, 2001).

For this reason, more appropriate regression formulas have been developed, such as the **Tanaka formula**, where HR~max~ is determined using the following formula: 208 – (0.7 × age) (Tanaka et al., 2001). It has been shown that this formula is more accurate than Haskell’s 220 – age formula for estimating an individual’s HR~max~ (Roy & McCrory, 2015).

Keep in mind, fitness professionals should never use this, or any other mathematical formula, as an absolute. A person’s heart rate response to exercise is dependent on many additional factors, including genetics, medications, and stimulant use such as caffeine. However, the Tanaka formula is very simple to use and can be easily implemented as a general starting point for measuring cardiorespiratory training intensity.

Consider the following example of a 40-year-old client who is tasked at exercising at 65% of her HR~max~. The formula would be solved as follows:

Tanaka formula: 208 – (0.7 × age) = HR~max~

                                208 – (0.7 × 40) = HR~max~

                                         208 – (28) = HR~max~

                                                    180 = HR~max~

180 beats per minute (bpm) is the client’s estimated HR~max~:

180 × 65% = 117

Thus, 117 bpm is the client’s **target heart rate**.

#### HEART RATE RESERVE

HRR, also known as the Karvonen method, is a method of establishing a client’s target heart rate based on the difference between a client’s estimated HR~max~ and their resting heart rate. This formula is likely more appropriate versus only calculating a percentage of HR~max~ because it considers an individual’s resting heart rate, which tends to vary from person to person.

The heart rate reserve formula is defined as follows:

[(HR~max~ – HR~rest~) × desired intensity] + HR~rest~ = Target heart rate

## Key Terms

**Tanaka formula**
A mathematical formula used to estimate an individual’s maximal heart rate: 208 – (0.7 × age).

**Target heart rate**
A predetermined exercising heart rate.