---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Introduction to Stage Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
When training at this level, it is imperative to rotate all four stages. There should be a low- (stage 1), medium- (stage 2), high-intensity (stage 3), and maximal-intensity (stage 4) day to help minimize the risk of overtraining.

Zone 4 intervals within a stage 4 workout should be brief: 5 to 10 seconds. Once fitness and overall conditioning improve, stage 4 programs can be progressed similarly to stage 2 and stage 3 workouts, decreasing work-to-rest ratios and increasing the frequency of high-intensity inter­vals. However, the frequency and duration of intervals should be client specific based on their goals, needs, abilities, and tolerance to intense activity.

### STAGE 5

Stage 5 consists of sport-specific training and is applicable for all types of athletes. It focuses on drills that help improve conditioning using linear, multidirectional, and sport-specific activities performed as conditioning and often combines high-intensity interval training with small-sided games and agility drills. This stage incorporates the movements, skills, and drills that coaches often use in practice sessions to apply a sport-related stimulus for metabolic benefits (Harrison et al., 2015; Stone & Kilding, 2009). The timing of the drills, the amount of rest provided, and the length of the session can progressively increase to more stressful, gamelike sessions as fitness improves and competition approaches.

While ventilatory testing and heart rate monitoring are not required during stage 5, the fitness professional can benefit from monitoring heart rates or RPE during specific drills to get a picture of the relative intensity of the session. Although consistent aerobic exercise is important for optimal sport preparation, caution is warranted to avoid excessive training volume at the highest intensities. Similar to stage 4 training, volume should be kept at a minimum to avoid overtraining, especially when exercise sessions involve maximal effort. Regular recovery and hydration periods should be included to ensure an optimal training response.