---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Components of Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Components of Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training

Exercise training programs should be designed to meet the specific needs and goals of the individual client. Furthermore, the initial exercise program should reflect (a) the initial fitness level of the client, (b) fitness assessment results, and (c) whether the client has any significant risk factors or health limitations to exercise. Each exercise training session should also include the following phases:

	- Warm-up phase

	- Conditioning phase

	- Cool-down phase

## Cardiorespiratory Warm-Up Phase

A warm-up is generally described as preparing the body for physical activity. It can be either general in nature or more specific to the activity. A **general warm-up **consists of movements that do not necessarily have any movement specific to the actual activity to be performed. Ex­amples of a general warm-up include walking on a treadmill or riding a stationary bicycle before weight training. A **specific warm-up **consists of movements that more closely mimic those of the actual activity, often referred to as dynamic stretches. Examples of a specific warm-up include performing body-weight squats, lunges, and push-ups before weight training. The pro­posed benefits of a warm-up are outlined in **Table 15-5 **(Mcgowan et al., 2015; Silva et al., 2018).

**TABLE 15-5 Benefits and Effects of a Warm-Up**

| Benefits | Effects |
|---|---|
| Increased heart and respiratory rate | Increases cardiorespiratory system’s capacity to perform work

Increases blood flow to muscles

Increases the oxygen exchange capacity |
| Increased tissue temperature | Increases rate of muscle contraction

Increases metabolic rate

Increases soft tissue extensibility |
| Increased psychological preparation for bouts of exercise | Increases the mental readiness of an individual |

## Key Terms

**General warm-up**
Low-intensity exercise consisting of movements that do not necessarily relate to the more intense exercise immediately following.

**Specific warm-up**
Low-intensity exercise consisting of movements that mimic those to be included in the more intense exercise immediately following.