---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 16
chapter_title: Core Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Importance of Properly Training the Core Muscles
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Additionally, hip musculature (e.g., gluteus medius) functions to maintain a level position of the pelvis. Improper positioning of the pelvis may result in improper postures of the spine. It is not clear if altered posture causes low-back pain (LBP) or if LBP results in altered posture (Roffey et al., 2010). Gluteus medius weakness is common in individuals with LBP and should be addressed as a way to manage the link between abnormal posture and LBP (Cooper et al., 2016). Therefore, proper core strength and stability are linked to proper posture, which is the reason maintaining proper body positioning, or form, should be emphasized while exercising as well as performing activities of daily life.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

**Posture, Injury Prevention, and the Core**

	- A study by Ahearn et al. (2018) found that the young female dancers who added Pilates-based core training to typical dance class participation improved both trunk and low-back posture, as well as body awareness, compared to the dancers who took part in dance classes only.

	- Buyukturan et al. (2017) found that in patients with neck pain and cervical disc herniation, 8 weeks of core training with cervical stability training was effective at relieving pain, improving muscle strength and endurance, and decreasing fear of movement (kinesiophobia).

	- In healthy adults, Mesquita Montes et al. (2017) found that the highest activity within the external oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis muscles during breathing activities was accomplished while in a standing position compared to sitting and kneeling postures, suggesting that the positioning of clients during core training is important for facilitating proper muscle activity.

	- In a study investigating muscle activity using electromyography (EMG) of the core musculature, Calatayud et al. (2015) found that exercises involving single-leg stance with the addition of elastic resistance generated the greatest EMG values.

	- Kiss et al. (2019) conducted a randomized controlled trial with 103 young kayak/canoe athletes, who are at a high risk for developing low-back pain. For the 50 athletes who underwent 6 months of preventive core muscle training, the authors found improved strength of the abdominal and back muscles, low-back motor control, and resting posture compared to those who did not complete core muscle training.

**Key Takeaways**

	- Core training can improve trunk and low-back posture, as well as body awareness.

	- Core training with cervical stability training can be effective at relieving pain and improving muscle strength and endurance.

	- The positioning of clients during core training is important for facilitating proper muscle activity.

	- Exercises involving unstable stances (single-leg stance) with external resistance can create greater muscle activation.

	- Core training can improve abdominal/low-back strength and motor control.

### PERFORMANCE

A strong and stable core is important for generating strong and explosive movements needed for optimal physical performance.

The core can be thought of as a foundation for producing and transmitting strong and controlled movements to the lower extremity and generating force production for the upper extremities (De Blaiser et al., 2018; Rivera, 2016; Willardson, 2007). Therefore, improving core performance, including strength, endurance, and coordinated muscle activation, should be viewed as a critical component of improving movements requiring upper and lower limb speed, strength, and endurance. There is evidence that core muscles activate prior to movements in the lower extremity, suggesting that proper core muscle function is essential for preparing the primary lower extremity movers to generate force (Hodges & Richardson, 1997a). Core stability and core strength are associated with increased lower extremity muscle strength (Dello Iacono et al., 2016) and increased takeoff velocity of a vertical jump (Butcher et al., 2007), as well as maximal squat performance.