---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 16
chapter_title: Core Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Importance of Properly Training the Core Muscles
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### DRAWING-IN MANEUVER

Research has demonstrated that electromyography activity is increased during pelvic stabilization and transverse abdominis activation when an abdominal drawing-in maneuver is initiated before activity (Cresswell et al., 1992; Hides et al., 2006; Richardson et al., 2002). Research has found that the transverse abdominis, when properly activated, creates tension in the thoracolumbar fascia (connective tissue of the low-back area) (**Figure 16-7**), contributing to spinal stiffness, and compresses the sacroiliac joint (**Figure 16-8**), increasing stability (Hodges & Richardson, 1997b, 1997c). These findings have led other researchers to further understand and demonstrate the important role of the transverse abdominis on spinal stability and LBP. To perform the drawing-in maneuver, pull in the region just below the navel toward the spine and maintain the cervical spine in a neutral position. Maintaining a neutral spine, or the normal curvatures of the spine during core training helps improve posture, muscle balance, and stabilization. If a forward protruding head is noticed during the drawing-in maneuver, the sternocleidomastoid (**Figure 16-9**) is preferentially recruited. If the sternocleidomastoid muscle is overactive and extends the upper cervical spine, the pelvis rotates anteriorly to realign the eyes. This can lead to muscle imbalances and decreased pelvic stabilization (McGill, 2001).

### ABDOMINAL BRACING

**Bracing** is referred to as a co-contraction of global muscles, such as the rectus abdominis and external obliques. Bracing is also commonly referred to as a “bearing down” or tightening of the global muscles by consciously contracting them. Research has shown that muscular endurance of global and local musculature, when contracted together, create the most benefit for those with LBP compared with traditional LBP training methods, such as solely emphasizing range of motion at the spine (McGill, 2001). Bracing focuses on global trunk stability, not simply on segmented vertebral stability, meaning that the global muscles, given the proper endurance training, will also work to stabilize the spine.

However, both the drawing-in maneuver and bracing can be implemented in a core training program to help retrain the strength, endurance, and motor control of local and global muscular systems and movement musculature (Larivière et al., 2019; McGill, 2001). Activation of the local stabilization system and the global stabilization system (Arokoski et al., 2001; Kibler et al., 1996; Larivière et al., 2019; McGill, 2001) has been demonstrated to preferentially activate these specific muscles during core training.

## Key Terms

**Bracing**
Contracting the global abdominals such as the rectus abdominis and obliques at the same time.

## Images

**Figure 16-7: Thoracolumbar fascia**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH16_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 16-8: Sacroiliac joint**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH16_FIGF08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 16-9: Sternocleidomastoid**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH16_FIGF09.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533