---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Scientific Rationale for Balance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Training in a proprioceptively enriched environment with appropriate types of balance equipment (i.e., floor, balance beam, half-foam roll, foam pad, balance disc, wobble board), correct technique, and at varying speeds facilitates maximal sensory input to the central nervous system. It also prepares the body for various scenarios that it may encounter in the real world, such as landing from a jump for an athlete or stepping off a curb for an older adult.

Fitness professionals are encouraged to implement progressive, systematic training programs to develop consistent, long-term changes in their clients. Training program designs that only focus on strength training protocols often deliver incomplete results, because the training program does not challenge the balance mechanisms of the human body. Balance training fills this gap by focusing on functional movement patterns in a multisensory, unstable environment (DiStefano et al., 2009; Zech et al., 2010). The design and implementation of balance exercises into a training program is critical for developing, improving, and restoring the synergy of muscle firing patterns required for dynamic balance and coordinated movement (Guskiewicz & Perrin, 1996; Tippet & Voight, 1995; Voight, 1996).

# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

**Improving Injury Resistance**

	- Bellows and Wong (2018) found that competitive athletes who performed balance training exercises reduced the risk of an ankle sprain by 46% compared to athletes who didn’t perform balance training exercises.

	- Nagano et al. (2011) evaluated the effect of a 5-week jump and balance program on lower extremity biomechanics and muscle activation in female basketball athletes. They found that the athletes demonstrated greater knee flexion motion and hamstring activation during landing, which may reduce the risk of ACL injury.

	- Hamed et al. (2018) demonstrated that physical exercise interventions, specifically involving exercises that challenge balance and posture, have the potential to significantly reduce fall risk in healthy older adults.

	- Sakata et al. (2019) demonstrated that youth baseball players who participated in an injury prevention program (including stretching and balance exercises) had significantly fewer shoulder and elbow injuries and improved parameters of pitching performance compared to players in the control group.

	- DiStefano et al. (2010) implemented an integrated injury prevention program that included static and dynamic balance exercises for 10-year-old soccer athletes and found these youth athletes were able to improve their dynamic balance ability.

	- Soligard et al. (2009) demonstrated that an integrated injury prevention program with balance exercises could reduce the risk of overuse injuries and severe injuries in adolescent female soccer athletes.

**Key Takeaways**

	- Balance training can reduce the risk of injury in competitive athletes.

	- When designing preseason and in-season injury prevention programs, balance training should be incorporated to improve performance and injury resistance.

	- Balance training is effective at decreasing the risk of falls in healthy older adults.