---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Essential Concepts of Balance
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Mechanisms of Balance

The ability to feel that the center of mass (COM) is moving toward a person’s limits of stability is a product of three sense-based systems: vision, vestibular, and somatosensation (Michael Selzer et al., 2006; Shumway-Cook & Woollacott, 2016) (**Figure 17-2**). Vision is typically used to provide information to the central nervous system about the body’s location in space (Kwon, 2018). Balance may be more difficult when an individual’s eyes are closed, because this person is no longer able to use vision to determine bodily position in space. Individuals may use vision to determine the best foot placement to maintain balance when moving over unstable surfaces (Logan et al., 2010). The vestibular system is controlled by sensory receptors in the inner ear and provide the brain information about spatial orientation and the movement of the head in space (Valovich McLeod & Hale, 2015).

**Figure 17-2The components of the balance system**Figure 17-3Integrating visual, vestibular, and somatosensory systems

Vestibular receptors are important for maintaining balance while bending over, as well as dynamic movements, like hopping or squatting. Somatosensation refers to the ability to feel changes in pressure on the skin, muscle length, and joint angles. Somatosensation is critically important for balancing on unstable surfaces and tasks that involve dynamic balance. It is possible that individuals may prioritize information gained from one sense over the other two (Wikstrom et al., 2017). Therefore, fitness professionals should incorporate balance training techniques that stress each of these senses to ensure their clients’ capability in attending to sensory information that arises from each of these three critical senses (**Figure 17-3**).

## Images

**Figure 17-2: The components of the balance system**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH17_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 17-3: Integrating visual, vestibular, and somatosensory systems**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH17_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533