---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 18
chapter_title: Plyometric (Reactive) Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Guidelines for Plyometric Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Assessing movement quality using movement assessments—as discussed in Chapter 12—is also a useful screening  tool. To  enhance performance while reducing the likelihood of injury, clients must recognize the importance of quality and proper plyometric technique while acquiring adequate base levels of strength and motor control. While all exercise includes some risk, the explosive actions of plyometrics suggest that Certified Personal Trainers should take a measured and progressive approach when using it with athletes and clients (Davies et al., 2015).

## Designing a Plyometric Training Program

A client must exhibit basic levels of total body strength, core strength, and balance before progressing into plyometric training. Fitness professionals must follow specific program guidelines, proper exercise selection criteria, and detailed program variables, such as intensity, volume, frequency, and progressions. Moreover, plyometric training should only be performed by individuals wearing supportive shoes and on a proper training surface, such as a grass field, basketball court, or tartan track. The training surface can have a profound effect on exercise performance when performing plyometric drills (Ramírez-Campillo et al., 2013).

When designing effective plyometric programs, it is helpful to remember many key concepts. First, plyometric exercises should progress from simple, to intermediate, to advanced movements and from low intensity to medium intensity to high intensity. As a general rule, clients should practice plyometric skills comprising dual-foot drills before progressing to  single-foot drills.

### INTENSITY

Plyometric intensity describes the distance covered and the amount of effort or stress applied by the muscles, connective tissue, and joints during plyometric drills (Davies et al., 2015; Oxfeldt et al., 2019). Intensity should be programmed based on the client’s ability to execute the exercise while maintaining adequate training technique. If technique is lost, the intensity should be lowered until proper technique is achieved. It is always better to start off conservatively, because the fitness professional can always increase the intensity of the exercises once the client masters the movement pattern. Moreover, it is important for clients to feel confident and display adequate movement competency during their exercise routine. If exercises are too difficult, clients may express feelings of shame, and consequently, their adherence to the exercise program may  become compromised.

### VOLUME

Plyometric volume is expressed as the number of foot contacts, throws, or catches. An example would be the completion of three sets of five squat jumps, equating to a volume of 15 total squat jumps (3 × 5). The volume in plyometric training is determined by the choice of exercise and intensity of movement. As with other forms of exercise training, an increase in intensity is often paired with a decrease in training volume.

### TRAINING FREQUENCY AND RECOVERY

Training frequency is determined by the client’s fitness level, current training program, training history, injury history, and training goals. A general recommendation is to allow at least 1 day between intense plyometric training sessions. At least 48 to 72 hours between sessions is the recommended guideline when implementing plyometrics for novice individuals. Research suggests that recovery between workouts must be sufficient to prevent overtraining and injury (Davies et al., 2015). Most apparently healthy clients will be able to perform one to three plyometric training sessions per week.