---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 18
chapter_title: Plyometric (Reactive) Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

Athletes are constantly looking for training methods to become more explosive and athletic. Although plyometrics are not usually stressed in the implementation of a fitness program for personal training clients, it is nonetheless a valuable component that can be included into the overall training plan. The practice of plyometric training is very important, considering the numerous injuries that occur as a result of a person’s inability to control decelerative force. Plyometric training helps clients develop both the muscular power and eccentric strength necessary to decelerate. The inherent nature of plyometric movements involves a quick and powerful effort entailing an eccentric muscle action, immediately followed by a powerful concentric muscle contraction. This specific outcome involves the stretch-shortening cycle. Plyometric exercise should be performed in a safe, systematic, and progressive manner to maximize effectiveness and safety for personal training clients.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

By integrating plyometric training, clients will be able to generate greater power output responses at faster speeds. Scientific literature has indicated that enhanced muscle power has been associated with improved athletic sports performance through improved jump performance, reduced sprint times, and increased strength. Further, the use of plyometric training prepares athletes and clients for the acceleration-deceleration and change-of-direction demands in certain sports and activities of daily living.

Plyometric training involves powerful stretch-shortening cycles in the muscle-tendon complex that often involve production of high eccentric muscle forces. The stretch-shortening cycle consists of three phases: (1) eccentric phase, (2) amortization phase, and (3) concentric phase. Plyometric training can significantly increase muscle force production and facilitate increases in strength and power. This is important for athletes and nonathletes alike because many activities of daily living require the expression of muscular force. However, when implementing plyometric training, fitness professionals must carefully consider intensity, volume, training frequency, and recovery when designing their client’s workouts.

Demonstrating and teaching proper technique, particularly during landing and jumping, are critical. Focus should include improving self-performance and enhancing the skill. Low- intensity plyometrics should be mastered prior to attempting more intense plyometric exercises. This will help the client become familiar with the movements while minimizing the likelihood of injury. Performing low-intensity plyometrics at lower training volumes should be used before advancing to moderate- or high-intensity exercises.

When introducing plyometric exercises, especially to new or beginner clients, the movements should initially involve small jumps to best learn the movement pattern. Additionally, when an individual lands during these exercises, they should hold the landing position for 3–5 seconds and make any adjustments necessary to correct faulty postures before performing the next jump.

The next progression is to involve jumps with more amplitude and dynamic motion. These exercises are performed in a repetitive manner, spending a relatively short amount of time on the ground before repeating the drill.

The last progression includes exercises that involve explosive, powerful movements that are performed as fast and as explosively as possible. These exercises are designed to further improve the rate of force production, eccentric strength, and reactive joint stabilization.