---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 18
chapter_title: Plyometric (Reactive) Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Principles of Plyometric Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### HELPFUL HINT

To better understand the stretch-shortening cycle, imagine holding a rubber band. To shoot that rubber band, the first step is to stretch it. Stretching the rubber band creates stored elastic energy that is waiting to be released. The next step is to release the rubber band, which uses the stored elastic energy to propel the rubber band through the air.

Human muscles work in a similar fashion. To jump upwards with maximal velocity, the first action is to quickly perform a shallow squat—an eccentric action. Performing the shallow squat stretches the gluteal complex, quadriceps, and calves. Consequently, these muscles are now storing elastic energy that is waiting to be released. Now, with the stored elastic energy, the jump will be more forceful—a concentric contraction.

## Importance of Plyometric Training

Plyometric exercises increase rate of force production (power) and motor unit recruitment (Ebben et al., 2008, 2011). These training exercises are a progression that can be incorporated once a client has achieved an overall strength base, proper core stability, and balance capabilities. Adequate isometric stabilization strength that is developed through core, balance, and resistance exercises decreases the time between the eccentric muscle action and concentric contraction, resulting in shorter ground contact times. This may result in a decrease of both tissue overload and potential injury when performing plyometric training (DiStefano et al., 2010, 2016).

Many movement patterns that occur during functional activities involve a series of repetitive stretch-shortening cycles. Stretch-shortening cycles require the neuromuscular system to react quickly and efficiently after an eccentric muscle action to produce a concentric contraction and impart the necessary force (or acceleration) in the appropriate direction. Therefore, improving functional movements, such as cutting or change of direction, may require exercise routines that emphasize plyometric training (Asadi et al., 2016).

Plyometric training provides the ability to train specific movement patterns in a biomechanically correct manner at a more functionally appropriate speed. This provides strengthening of the muscles and connective tissue to meet the demands of everyday activities and sport (Cherni et al., 2019; Hirayama et al., 2017). The ultimate goal of plyometric training is to maximize function as described by the integrated performance paradigm (Davies et al., 2015). This also results in increased speed of movement for the individual.

The speed of muscular exertion is limited by neuromuscular coordination. Plyometric training improves **neuromuscular efficiency** and improves the range of speed set by the central nervous system (Davies et al., 2015; Silva et al., 2019). Optimal reactive performance of any activity depends on the speed at which muscular forces can be generated.

Plyometric training is often perceived by many to be too dangerous, potentially increasing the risk of injury. However, plyometric training has a systematic progression sequence that allows a client to begin with less demanding exercises and progress to more demanding exercises as they adapt.

## Key Terms

**Neuromuscular efficiency**
The ability of the nervous system to recruit the correct muscles to produce force, reduce force, and dynamically stabilize the body’s structure in all three planes of motion.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH18_BOXHH01_01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533