---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 19
chapter_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness for Nonathletic Populations
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Speed, Agility, and Quickness for Nonathletic Populations

WeAre/Shutterstock.com

Although speed, agility, and quickness training is a widely used and accepted improvement method for sports performance in athletes, components of an SAQ program can also significantly improve the physical health profile of apparently healthy sedentary adults and those with medical or health limitations (Bohrer et al., 2019; Galpin et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2017). Many recreational activities, such as softball, golf, tennis, hiking, running, skiing, and water sports, require a combination of coordination, power, reaction time, and agility (Ceylan & Saygin, 2015; Cherappurath & Elayaraja, 2017). These activities may become more challenging with age or sedentary living, preventing some from enjoying these activities throughout life. By contrast, the increased physical demands of SAQ training can improve athleticism and movement proficiency and aid in injury prevention (Polman et al., 2009; Simonek et al., 2016; Young et al., 2015) when applied safely and effectively. In addition, individuals from a variety of populations find SAQ training fun and invigorating while increasing exercise compliance, adherence, and effectiveness.

Unlike the more common steady-state, moderate-intensity cardiovascular forms of exercise (such as treadmill walking) often prescribed for nonathletic populations, SAQ drills require greater integration with a variety of the body’s biologic systems. An individual must be able to accelerate, decelerate, and change direction in response to a variety of both predictable and unpredictable stimuli at a relatively high rate of speed. Thus, SAQ training provides a unique challenge to the biologic systems of nonathletic individuals, facilitating constant responses and adaptation. Such rapid adaptation to SAQ training is critical in the development, maintenance, and improvement of physical function from childhood through a person’s senior years.

Because of the elevated intensity of SAQ protocols, it is essential that fitness professionals perform extensive client assessments examining exercise experience, movement quality, health history, and injury profile before beginning an SAQ training program. Moreover, SAQ training should always follow a comprehensive warm-up protocol. Prior to beginning SAQ training, clients should have a good base of fitness that incorporates flexibility (including mobility in the ankles, hips, and thoracic spine), muscular endurance, cardiovascular endurance, and strength. Establishing a solid base of fitness in these components can help nonathletic populations avoid injury when SAQ training is introduced. Once introduced, SAQ drills should progress from slow and simple to fast and complex over an extended period of time. The initial focus during these exercises should be technique rather than speed to ensure that exercises are performed properly and that a client is adequately prepared for these demands before progressing to speed-focused performance.

## SAQ Training Programs for Youth

Matimix/Shutterstock.com

From birth, children are programmed to develop progressively higher neuromuscular capabilities in line with their physical and mental maturation. Much of this development is innate at very early stages; for example, crawling progresses to standing, standing progresses to walking, and walking progresses to running. Once a child has developed basic ambulation, the rate and magnitude at which they progress beyond that point often depend on an external interaction with the environment (Drabik, 1996). To continue developing effectively, the environment must challenge children’s biologic systems; in other words, they must learn how to adapt and apply appropriate movement patterns through external measures.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH19_UNNUN03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH19_UNNUN04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533