---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Safety
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Spotting Techniques

The Certified Personal Trainer must teach and model proper technique during exercise, perform proper spotting, and monitor all exercise movements until safe execution has been mastered. It is critical for fitness professionals to exhibit large degrees of confidence and experience with respect to spotting technique to provide maximum safety and high-quality coaching for every session. Compound exercises, such as a barbell back squat, bench press, or dumbbell shoulder press, require a spotter to reduce injury risk, especially when using heavier loads. Research has indicated that a decrease in injuries occurs through proper spotting techniques (Lombardi & Troxel, 2003).

The following checklist should be used by the fitness professional during spotting activities:

	- The spotter should regulate the number of total repetitions performed by the client prior to the beginning of each set.

	- The spotter should stand and maintain a stable, wide-stance body position to increase maximal safety of the corresponding exercise.

	- An experienced spotter delivers adequate and ample support for the client to successfully execute the lift, especially when lifting through the sticking point.

	- The Certified Personal Trainer is encouraged to spot at the client’s wrists instead of the elbows when using dumbbells (i.e., in a dumbbell shoulder press). Spotting at the wrist provides better support for the lifter and eliminates the elbows collapsing inward.

	- During the barbell squat exercise, the spotter should be positioned behind the lifter and place their upper arms underneath the lifter’s armpits. This provides maximum spotting security between the spotter and the lifter.

	- The Certified Personal Trainer is encouraged to use an additional spotter for exercises when the load surpasses what a single spotter can successfully manage on their own. For example, two spotters will stand on opposite sides of the barbell during a heavy barbell back squat exercise (**Figure 20-7**). When and if needed, the spotters will assist the client in accomplishing the movements by lifting the ends of the barbell until they are able to complete the exercise.

	- It is not recommended for fitness professionals to spot machine-based or cable-based exercises by placing their hands underneath the weight stack. This increases risk of injury to the spotter and the lifter.

## Images

**Figure 20-7: Two people spotting a barbell squat**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH20_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533