---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Introduction to Acute Variables
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

The five components of fitness include the following:

	- Cardiovascular endurance

	- Muscular strength

	- Muscular endurance

	- Flexibility

	- Body composition

One key characteristic of training volume is that volume and intensity must be strategically and systematically increased throughout all training programs to avoid training plateaus and necessitate continued progress. Training volume can be changed by altering the number of exercises performed, repetitions performed, or sets performed for each training session. Another key aspect of training volume is that volume and intensity have an inverse relationship. As intensity increases, volume usually decreases. As volume increases, intensity is often reduced. This is frequently observed in variations and models of periodization.

### TRAINING FREQUENCY

Training frequency usually describes the total number of weekly training sessions. Frequency is directly related to duration and intensity of training and can vary depending on the client’s goals, preferences, and time limitations. There are numerous factors influencing training frequency. These may include the type of exercise performed, total involvement of muscle groups, the client’s training status, and overall structure of the program, with specific focus on intensity and volume (Ochi et al., 2018; Schoenfeld et al., 2015; Schoenfeld, Ogborn, et al., 2016; Yue et al., 2018). In addition, the general lifestyle and social habits of the client will also be an influential factor in frequency and its implementation in the program. Fitness professionals may accidentally implement a wide variety of training without considering the way each factor stresses the client’s workload. Therefore, consideration of the workload must take precedence. A general recommendation is to allow at least 1 day of rest between resistance training sessions that stress identical muscle groups. Specific recommendations are dependent on the client’s overall training status: beginner, intermediate, or advanced (**Table 20-4**).

**TABLE 20-4 General Recommendations for Training Frequency**

| Resistance Training Status | Recommended Frequency (Sessions per Week) |
|---|---|
| Beginning or novice | 2–3 |
| Intermediate | 3 if using total body training sessions

4 if using a split regimen (i.e., training different muscle groups each session) |
| Advanced | 4–6; these individuals may perform many sessions in a single day |