---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Progressive Adaptations from Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Strength cannot be thought of in isolation. Strength is built on the foundation of stabilization requiring muscles, tendons, and ligaments to be prepared for the load that will be required to increase strength beyond the initial stages of training. Whereas stabilization-focused resistance training is designed with the characteristics of type I slow-twitch muscle fibers in mind (slow-contracting, low-tension output, and resistant to fatigue), strength-focused resistance training is designed to match the characteristics of type II muscle fibers (quick-contracting, high-tension output, prone to fatigue). Thus, resistance training variables (sets, reps, intensities) are manipulated to take advantage of the specific characteristics of each fiber type. The majority of strength increases will occur during the first 12 weeks of resistance training from increased neural recruitment and muscle hypertrophy (Duchateau et al., 2006; Evans, 2019; Schoenfeld, 2010; Schoenfeld et al., 2015). Intermediate and advanced lifters will find it necessary to carry out a more demanding program in terms of training volume and intensity by following a sound periodized schedule.

## Power

**Power** is the ability of the neuromuscular system to produce the greatest possible force in the shortest possible time. This is represented by the simple equation of force multiplied by velocity (force × velocity). Power adaptations build on stabilization and strength adaptations and then apply them at more realistic speeds and forces seen in everyday life and sporting activities. The focus of power-resistance training lies in getting the neuromuscular system to generate force as quickly as possible (**rate of force production**).

An increase in either force or velocity will produce an increase in power. Training for power can be achieved by increasing the weight (force), as seen in the strength adaptations, or increasing the speed with which weight is moved (velocity). Power training allows for increased rate of force production by increasing the number of motor units activated, the synchronization between them, and the speed at which they are activated (Maffiuletti et al., 2016; Tredrea, 2017). The GAS and principle of specificity both dictate that to maximize training for this type of adaptation, both heavy and light loads must be moved as fast as possible, yet in a safe fashion. Thus, using both training methods in a superset fashion can create the necessary adaptations to enhance the body’s ability to recruit a large number of motor units and increase the rate (speed) of activation (Hermassi et al., 2019; Maffiuletti et al., 2016; Pichardo et al., 2019; Rhea & Alderman, 2004).

### GETTING TECHNICAL

As mentioned previously, power can be defined as force × velocity. However, another equation exists for power and is often used by sport scientists and engineers.

Power is defined as the rate at which work is performed. It is calculated by dividing the amount of work performed by the length of time to perform that work.

Work ÷ Time

Power can be measured in many forms (such as horsepower), but in the context of human performance, the most common method of measurement is watts.

## Key Terms

**Power**
Force × Velocity or Work ÷ Time

**Rate of force production**
Ability of muscles to exert maximal force output in a minimal amount of time.