---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Introduction to Acute Variables
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### TRAINING DURATION

**Training duration** describes the length of a training session (Borde et al., 2015; Wilk, Golas, et al., 2018). It is important for the fitness professional to understand that duration and intensity have an inverse relationship. Specifically, as the intensity of an exercise session increases, the duration session will decrease. Like many facets of training, there are other factors involved with duration, such as client health status, training level, and program goals. Volume and specific types of training are also key factors. In most fitness-related scenarios, exercise sessions typically last between 30 and 90 minutes.

### EXERCISE SELECTION

Exercise selection is of considerable importance when designing resistance training programs. Exercise selection is often influenced by these factors: specificity of training, availability of equipment, training history, dedication to training, and time availability. For example, performing multijoint exercises takes considerably more effort than performing single-joint exercises (e.g., leg extension or bicep curls). When employing exercise selection, the first factor to consider is establishing the correct exercise technique. Regarding novice clients with unaccustomed training technique or faulty movement patterns, the fitness professional is mandated to provide excellent technique demonstration and explanation and even allow an adequate adjustment period for proper technique sequencing. This is often a good opportunity for the Certified Personal Trainer to modify an exercise or teach a movement pattern, to help build a solid foundation of exercise technique prior to forthcoming programs. After careful review of these factors, the fitness professional can offer exercise selections that maximize training adaptations that address the client’s specific training goals and reduce the likelihood of injury.

It is a well-accepted practice of performing large-muscle-mass exercises prior to small-musclemass exercises during resistance training (Simao et al., 2005). The justification behind this training recommendation is twofold. First, muscle force production for the entire training session becomes significantly greater when multijoint or compound exercises are performed before small-muscle groups. Second, when single-joint exercises are performed first, the force production for larger muscle mass exercises is reduced.

In addition, multijoint exercises require greater stabilization of the body compared to single-joint exercises. In contrast, single-joint exercises allow for a greater focus on individual muscles. The use of single-joint exercises can be used to selectively target any underdeveloped musculature and can enhance muscular symmetry. Ordering resistance exercises in this specific way may result in greater strength improvements.

### EXERCISE ORDER

The arrangement of exercise order both describes the way in which exercises are performed during the workout and is influenced by factors including the potential goals of the client, the fatigue response of the exercise, and the specific types of exercise, such as multijoint or single-joint (Cardozo et al., 2019; Simao et al., 2005). The main method of exercise order is to first arrange them in order of priority. Specifically, the client will first perform the exercises that emphasize their specific goals in the workout and then implement the less specific goals toward the end of the training session. Reducing the element of fatigue is the primary justification for placing the priority exercise first. The other method of exercise order is according to the type of exercise: multijoint or single-joint. Multijoint, also known as compound exercises, involves engagement of large muscle mass that involves two or more primary joints. Single-joint, also known as an assistance exercise, typically recruits smaller muscle mass and the use of single-joint exercises (e.g., bicep curls or triceps extensions). The fitness professional should have the ability to choose from a multitude of exercises, for both multijoint and single-joint exercises.

This exact organization of exercise order allows the client to perform compound exercises under low fatigue while also maximizing excellent technique. Therefore, the fitness professional should be able to optimize the training loads and tolerance levels for all clients by arranging them in an ideal way to best reduce fatigue.

## Key Terms

**Training duration**
The amount of time of a training session.