---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Resistance Training Systems
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
The amount of rest and load used during each set is dependent on the client’s goals and fitness level. Heavier loads and slightly longer rest periods are recommended for clients seeking maximal strength, whereas moderate loads and shorter rest periods are ideal for clients seeking muscular endurance or body composition changes.

## The Circuit-Training System

The circuit-training system consists of a series of exercises that an individual performs one after the other, with minimal rest between each exercise (**Figure 20-6**). The typical training variables for a circuit-training program include a low to moderate number of sets (1–3), with moderate to high repetitions (8–20) and minimal rest periods between exercises; however, these variables can be manipulated to enhance the desired effect (Alcaraz et al., 2011; Harber et al., 2004). Circuit training is a great training system for individuals with limited time and for those who want to alter body composition (Alcaraz et al., 2011; Harber et al., 2004).

## The Peripheral Heart Action System

The peripheral heart action system is another variation of circuit training that alternates upper body and lower body exercises throughout the circuit. This system of training distributes blood flow between the upper and lower extremities, potentially improving circulation. The number of exercises per sequence varies with the program’s goal. The individual typically performs 8 to 20 repetitions per exercise, depending on their desired adaptation and fitness level. This system is very beneficial for incorporating an integrated, multidimensional program and for altering body composition and improving health outcomes (Piras et al., 2015). An example of a peripheral heart action system using common resistance training exercises can be seen in **Table 20-6**.

**TABLE 20-6 Example Peripheral Heart Action System**

| Resistance Training Exercises |
|---|
| Dumbbell chest press |
| Dumbbell squat |
| Seated machine row |
| Dumbbell Romanian deadlift |
| Standing dumbbell shoulder press |

## Images

**Figure 20-6: Example circuit**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH20_FIGF06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533