---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Safety
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Safety

The most important objective and goal for the Certified Personal Trainer is to commit to doing no harm to their clients. Like all athletic activities, the susceptibility to injury is always present. However, the fitness professional should use all measures of risk management to keep injury risk to a minimum while maximizing client results. When the Certified Personal Trainer increases knowledge through science and application, awareness is enhanced and the risk of client injury due to poor judgment and negligence is decreased.

## Maintaining a Safe Environment

The fitness professional’s scope of practice involves the responsibility of interviewing potential clients to gather relevant information regarding their personal health history, lifestyle, and willingness and ability to exercise. Much of their centered care is concentrated on instructing, demonstrating, teaching, evaluating, and providing extensive education to their clients. The Certified Personal Trainer must effectively create and endorse the use of safe and efficient exercise programming through appropriate client consultation, screening, and comprehensive evaluation. Certified Personal Trainers should also be able to respond appropriately in emergency situations if and when they arise.

## Proper Equipment Setup

Equipment should be grouped and placed according to specific categories, including free weights, resistance training machines, plyometrics, and warm-up areas. Proper setup ensures adequate flow throughout the gym and weight room, reducing congestion and maximizing the use of space. Fitness professionals should be cognizant of the specific equipment used during their sessions and return all equipment to its original place. This helps maintain the condition of equipment and potentially reduces the risk of injury because unkempt or untidy equipment can become a tripping hazard. Fitness professionals should never use damaged equipment in the facility, such as frayed cables and missing or unstable pieces. All equipment should be repaired or replaced if broken. Current and existing equipment should be regularly cleaned and upgraded over time.