---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# The Principle of Specificity: The SAID Principle

The **principle of specificity**, often referred to as the **SAID (specific adaptation to imposed demands) principle**, describes the body’s responses and adaptations to exercise and training. The body’s adaptations are specific to the type of exercise and muscle group(s) involved. For example, if someone repeatedly lifts heavy weights, that person will produce higher levels of maximal strength. Conversely, if a person repeatedly lifts lighter weights for many repetitions, that person will develop higher levels of muscular endurance. Some types of specificity include the following:

	- Specificity of energy systems (anaerobic and aerobic)

	- Specificity of mode of training

	- Specificity of muscle groups and movement patterns

	- Posture specificity

This principle infers that one should aim to keep all training as specific as possible. The fitness professional can use this principle and apply it to training certain muscle groups, specific energy systems, functional movement patterns, velocity of movement, or even particular muscle actions (e.g., eccentric, concentric, isometric). One of the biggest and most effective ways to apply specificity of training is to identify specific movement patterns. Those sports that require high velocity of movement should emphasize exercise movements that integrate these patterns, such as plyometrics or power-based resistance exercises. Overall, the more similarity that exists from the training program to movement patterns, the greater can be the effect and transfer to sport-related activities.

An exception to this rule occurs when specific movement patterns elevate risk of injury or exacerbate dysfunctional movements. When these situations arise, exercises should be kept as specific as possible while mitigating the risk of injury. For example, an athlete may require high levels of power, but perhaps this same athlete lacks eccentric control and displays poor landing mechanics when performing jump-landing tasks. As such, the fitness professional must train the athlete in a systematic fashion, first emphasizing eccentric control and proper landing mechanics before progressing toward explosive movement patterns that are necessary for their sport.

### TRAINING TIP

Remember that type I muscle fibers function differently than type II muscle fibers. Type I (e.g., slow-twitch) muscle fibers are important for muscles that need to produce long-term contractions necessary for joint stabilization, endurance, and postural control. Type II (fast-twitch) muscle fibers are larger in size, quick to produce maximal tension, and fatigue more quickly than type I fibers. These fibers are important for muscles producing movements requiring force and power, such as performing a sprint. To train with higher intensities, proper postural stabilization is required, and therefore, tissues need to be trained differently to prepare them for higher levels of training. This emphasizes the need for exercise programs to be both systematic and progressive based on the ability level of the client, in addition to following the principle of specificity.

## Mechanical, Neuromuscular, and Metabolic Specificity

The previous section briefly discussed common types of specificity. This section aims to provide more detail concerning mechanical, neuromuscular, and metabolic specificity and how these specificities relate to an exercise training program.

## Key Terms

**Principle of specificity**
A principle stating that the body will adapt to the specific demands that are placed on it; also known as the specific adaptations to imposed demands (SAID) principle.