---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Introduction to Acute Variables
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Acute Variables

**Acute variables**, also known as exercise training variables, provide the foundation of any exercise program. They determine the amount of stress placed on the body and, ultimately, the physical adaptations that occur. The information presented in this section further details all acute variables and guides the fitness professional in the development of a resistance training program. Acute variables include repetitions, sets, training intensity, repetition tempo, rest intervals, training volume, training frequency, training duration, exercise selection, and exercise order.

### HELPFUL HINT

Acute variables include the following:

	- Repetitions

	- Sets

	- Training intensity

	- Repetition tempo

	- Rest intervals

	- Training volume

	- Training frequency

	- Training duration

	- Exercise selection

	- Exercise order

For continued adaptations and improvement, the fitness professional must consider a periodized training approach and proper manipulation of acute variables to reduce potential injury or overtraining while facilitating sustained progress. Resistance training programs are often designed through the lens of many disciplines: bodybuilding, powerlifting, Olympic weightlifting, strength and conditioning, and physical therapy. Moreover, resistance training programs vary considerably by professionals in these categories. While the overall breadth and depth of training experiences will largely dictate how well a program is developed and executed, it is not the sole determinate of client success. Designing a safe and effective resistance training program requires a variety of skills, including knowledge gained through continued education, personal interest in exercise, effective communication, buy-in and relationship building, and working with a variety of clientele.

It is imperative for the Certified Personal Trainer to develop the correct application and combination of exercise training knowledge, experience, and skills to be competent at designing resistance training programs for a variety of clients. At a minimum, fitness professionals should be able to answer the following questions with confidence for all their clients:

	- Which exercises are most appropriate for my client?

	- Which exercises are contraindicated for my client (i.e., should not be used)?

	- Which exercise intensities are appropriate for my client?

	- How many exercises are appropriate for my client?

	- How many sets and repetitions should my client perform?

	- How many days per week should my client train?

Without possessing the appropriate knowledge and education to answer these questions, the fitness professional may design inappropriate, ineffective, or even unsafe programs for their clients.

## Acute Variables of Training

Acute variables are the most fundamental components of designing a training program, including resistance exercise. They determine the specific demands placed on the body over the course of exercise training. When applied during an exercise program, the acute variables dictate these demands and the adaptations achieved. Properly manipulating acute variables fosters structured and systematic program planning to elicit optimal performance (Ciolac & Rodrigues-Da-Silva, 2016; Duchateau et al., 2006; Evans, 2019; Mike et al., 2017; Schoenfeld et al., 2015; Schoenfeld, Ogborn, et al., 2017; Wilk, Stastny, et al., 2018). To ensure proper development and progression of a resistance training program, fitness professionals must understand the acute training variables. Each of the acute variables are thoroughly explained in this chapter.

## Key Terms

**Acute variables**
Important components that specify how each exercise is to be performed; also known as exercise training variables.