---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
It is important for fitness professionals to remember that a client’s training program should be designed to meet the specific demands of their daily life, health, and wellness goals. The following example applies the concept of specificity to a client whose goal is body fat reduction.

	- Mechanically, the body burns more calories when movements are performed while standing, versus a seated or lying position, and using moderate weights (Duchateau et al., 2006; Gabriel et al., 2006). An example would be performing standing cable rows versus seated machine rows.

	- From a neuromuscular standpoint, the body burns more calories when more muscles are in use for longer periods in controlled, unstable environments. An example would be performing a standing dumbbell shoulder press versus a seated machine shoulder press.

	- Metabolically, the body burns more calories when rest periods are short to minimize full recuperation. An example would be to have clients perform resistance training exercises in a circuit fashion with little to no rest between sets.

When applying the principles of specificity to a training program for weight loss, the client should perform most exercises while standing and using moderate weights. The client should also recruit and use as many muscles as possible during each exercise and carefully monitor rest periods for greater caloric expenditure.