---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Guidelines for Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Resistance Training Progressions

When introducing resistance exercises into an exercise program, the exercises should initially focus on optimizing ideal movement patterns. These patterns include (but are not limited to) squatting, pushing, pulling, vertical pressing, and hip hinging. Clients should become familiar with these basic movement patterns before a fitness professional introduces intricate or advanced forms of exercise. In addition, a focus on acquiring basic exercise skills, such as the proper use of exercise machines, free weights, and other types of exercise equipment, is paramount. This is especially important to minimize injury risk for new or deconditioned clients.

Once a client displays adequate movement competency, resistance exercises can progress. The National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM) recommends progressing resistance training in a systematic fashion, using these three steps: (1) stabilization-focused exercises, (2) strength-focused exercises, and (3) power-focused exercises. The sequence is critically important.

### STABILIZATION-FOCUSED EXERCISES

First, clients should focus on the adaptations of stability and muscular endurance. This provides an adequate foundation of core and joint stability and prepares connective tissue (tendons, ligaments) for higher demands of training. In addition, the client will obtain greater levels of muscular endurance and strengthen type 1 muscle fibers necessary for maintaining ideal posture and spine stability, especially during more advanced forms of exercises that use heavier loads. This form of resistance training should provide greater demands on core stability and **proprioception** by progressing from **bilateral** to **unilateral** movements, using slow repetition tempos and high repetition schemes. For example, the standing cable row can be progressed from two-arm movements to alternating-arm movements to one-arm movements, providing greater variety in one exercise (**Figure 20-9**).

## Key Terms

**Proprioception**
The body’s ability to naturally sense its general orientation and relative position of its parts.

**Bilateral**
Relating to two sides of the body.

**Unilateral**
Relating to one side of the body.

## Images

**Figure 20-9: Standing cable row progression**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20CH20_FIG9.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533