---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Progressive Adaptations from Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Progressive Adaptations from Resistance Training

The concept of adaptation makes it clear that some type of change will occur based on the stresses placed on the body. Resistance training programs are designed to produce changes that result in various adaptations. Whether the goal is to increase muscular endurance, strength, hypertrophy, or power or to reduce body fat and improve overall health, the use of resistance training is an important component of any fitness program. This will help ensure optimal health and longevity for the client. As clients develop greater strength and endurance, they can train for longer periods before reaching the exhaustion stage (e.g., GAS), which leads to greater degrees of change and adaptation realized over time. The main adaptations that occur from resistance training include stabilization, muscular endurance, hypertrophy, strength, and power.

## Stabilization

**Stabilization** is the body’s ability to provide optimal dynamic joint support to maintain correct posture during all movements. In other words, stabilization is getting the right muscles to fire, with the right amount of force, in the proper plane of motion, and at the right time to support our joints and spine. This requires high levels of muscular endurance for optimal recruitment of prime movers to increase concentric force production and reduce eccentric force. Repeatedly training with controlled, unstable exercises increases the body’s ability to stabilize and balance itself (Coulombe et al., 2017; Lesinski et al., 2015). Conversely, if training is not performed with controlled unstable exercises, clients may not gain the same level of stability, and their joint stability may even worsen (Behm et al., 2010; Lesinski et al., 2015). Research shows that improper stabilization can negatively affect a muscle’s force production (Behm et al., 2010; Brachman et al., 2017; Rivera et al., 2017). Stability is an important training adaptation because it increases the ability of the body to stabilize the core and joints during movement, thus allowing the arms and legs to work more efficiently (Huxel Bliven & Anderson, 2013).

### TRAINING TIP

Stabilization-focused resistance exercises are unstable in nature and typically require a standing, single-leg stance, or use of a balance modality. In other words, the client must support their spine and posture with their core and joint stabilizers versus relying on artificial support, such as a bench or machine. It is important to note that the amount of instability should be client specific based on their physical capabilities. This cannot be overemphasized: stabilization-focused exercises should only introduce an amount of instability that can be safely controlled by the client. The client must be able to perform the exercises while maintaining ideal posture.

Additionally, stabilization-focused resistance exercises are not ideal for developing muscular hypertrophy or maximal strength because heavier loads are required, which necessitate a stable environment due to safety concerns (Behm et al., 2010). But stabilization-focused resistance exercises lay a solid foundation of core and joint stability, prior to client attempts at advanced forms of strength training, and play an integral role in a periodized training plan.

## Muscular Endurance

**Muscular endurance** is the ability to produce and maintain force production for prolonged periods of time. Developing and improving muscular endurance is an integral component of all fitness programs; it helps increase core and joint stabilization, which is the foundation on which hypertrophy, strength, and power are built. Training for muscular endurance of the core focuses on the recruitment of muscles responsible for postural stability—namely, type I muscle fibers.

Research has shown that resistance training protocols using high repetitions are the most effective means of improving muscular endurance. In addition, a periodization training program can enhance local muscular endurance as well, and after an initial training effect in previously untrained individuals, multiple sets of periodized training may prove superior to single-set training for improving muscle endurance (Evans, 2019). Previous position statements by Ratamess and colleagues (2009) found that a relationship exists between increases in strength and local muscular endurance, indicating that strength training alone may improve endurance to a certain extent. However, specificity of training produces the greatest improvements. Training to increase muscular endurance implies that the individual performs many repetitions, which increases a muscle’s time under tension, and/or minimizes rest periods between sets (Evans, 2019; Schoenfeld, 2011; Schoenfeld, Grgic, et al., 2017).

## Key Terms

**Stabilization**
The body’s ability to provide optimal dynamic joint support to maintain correct posture during all movements.

**Muscular endurance**
The ability to produce and maintain force production for prolonged periods of time.