---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Strength Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
##### TRAINING TIP

Sample plyometric exercises following this protocol include (but are not limited to) squat jumps, tuck jumps, butt kicks, and power step-ups.

All exercises should be performed with precise technique to minimize the risk of injury. Choose between six and eight SAQ exercises with a repetition range of three to five and perform for three to four sets.

### STRENGTH LEVEL RESISTANCE TRAINING

Each phase within the strength level of the OPT model has specific resistance training protocols to elicit a specific physical adaptation.

#### PHASE 2 RESISTANCE TRAINING PROTOCOL

Phase 2 is a hybrid form of training and can be considered a bridge between stability-focused training performed in Phase 1 and muscular hypertrophy-focused training used in Phase 3. Phase 2 requires the use of supersets in which the first exercise is a traditional strength-training exercise immediately followed by a stability-focused exercise for the same body part. For example, a client can perform a traditional bench press exercise, which is a traditional strength-focused exercise for the chest, immediately followed by a push-up, which is an exercise that places a greater emphasis on postural control, stability, and muscular endurance. **Table 21-1: 0** lists common supersets that can be performed using this style of training, but the possibilities are nearly limitless. Choose between one and two supersets for each body part with a repetition range of 8 to 12 and two to four sets. The first exercise in the superset will be performed using a moderate 2-0-2-0 tempo, and the second exercise will involve a slow 4-2-1-1 repetition tempo.

**TABLE 21-10: Example Phase 2 Supersets**

| Strength-Focused Exercise | Stability-Focused Exercise |
|---|---|
| Bench press | Push-up |
| Machine chest press | Single-leg cable press |
| Machine lat pulldown | Standing lat pulldown |
| Machine cable row | Standing cable row |
| Machine shoulder press | Standing bottoms-up kettlebell press |
| Seated dumbbell shoulder press | Single-leg dumbbell shoulder press |
| Barbell squat | Single-leg squat |
| Romanian deadlift | Single-leg Romanian deadlift |
| Machine calf raise | Single-leg calf raise |