---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
**TABLE 21-3: Summary Chart of OPT Model**

| Level | Phase | Primary Adaptations | Primary Methods of Progression |
|---|---|---|---|
| Stabilization | 1. Stabilization Endurance Training | Mobility and flexibility
	Core and joint stabilization
	Postural alignment and control
	Muscular and aerobic endurance | Master basic movement patterns.
	Progress exercises proprioceptively (controlled, yet unstable) once basic movement patterns are established.
	Increase the complexity of exercises once basic movement patterns have been established. |
| Strength | 2. Strength Endurance Training | Core strength and joint stabilization
	Muscular endurance and prime mover strength | Decrease rest periods.
	Increase the volume of exercises (reps + sets).
	Increase the load (weight) of resistance training exercises.
	Increase the complexity of resistance training exercises. |
| 3. Muscular Development Training | Core strength
	Muscular strength and hypertrophy | Increase the volume of exercises.
	Increase the load of resistance training exercises.
	Increase the complexity of resistance training exercises. |
| 4. Maximal Strength Training | Core strength
	Maximal muscular strength | Increase the load of resistance training exercises.
	Increase the sets of resistance training exercises. |
| Power | 5. Power Training | Core strength
	Maximal muscular strength
	Rate of force production | Increase the load of resistance training exercises.
	Increase the speed (repetition tempo) of exercises.
	Increase the sets of exercises. |

The workout template is structured to take the client from a warm-up through cool-down and is divided into six parts: Warm-Up, Activation, Skill Development, Resistance Training, Client’s Choice, and Cool-Down.