---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Applying the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
## Applying the OPT Model for Increasing Lean  Body Mass

Muscle hypertrophy can be simply defined as the chronic enlargement of muscles. To accomplish this goal, training programs need to be progressed with higher volumes (more sets, reps, and intensity) to force muscles to regenerate their cellular makeup and produce increased size. The following program is a general representation of how the OPT model is used for clients with the goal of increased lean body mass. With the goal of hypertrophy, the client can be cycled through the first four phases of the OPT model, depending on the needs and wants of the client.

**Figure 21-1: 6** shows an example annual plan. The client will start January in Phase 1 to ensure proper muscle balance and endurance of the stabilization muscles. Clients will remain there for approximately 4 weeks before moving into Phase 2. Phase 1 is vital for this client, as it will prepare the connective tissues and muscles for the higher demands of training required for this goal. Without proper preparation, injury may occur. The remainder of the annual plan shows the client cycling through Phases 2 through 4. Phase 2 will promote greater strength endurance and more volume to prepare the client for the greater demands of Phases 3 and 4.

**Figure 21-16Annual plan for the goal of muscle gain

Phase 3 is specific for maximal hypertrophy and will place larger volumes of stress through the body to force cellular changes that result in muscle hypertrophy. Phase 4 is used to increase the strength capacity to allow the client to train with heavier weights in the future. This will equate to higher volumes of training and greater hypertrophy. Cardiorespiratory training should be performed each month to ensure the cardiorespiratory system is efficient and to promote optimal tissue recovery.

**Figure 21-1: 7** illustrates the monthly plan for January (Phase 1). This plan demonstrates a 4-day-per-week workout plan, with scheduled workouts on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays, using a split routine for body parts. Cardio can be done on the workout days (or any other day during the week, depending on the client’s schedule).

**Figure 21-17Muscle gain monthly plan: January

## Images

**Figure 21-16: Annual plan for the goal of muscle gain**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH21_fig21.16_annual-muscle-gain.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 21-17: Muscle gain monthly plan: January**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20CH21_fig21.17_muscle-gain-jan.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533