---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
##### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Do not assume that push-and-pull exercises need to be separated; they can be seamlessly integrated into a single workout. Alternating push-and-pull exercises provides a different stimulus than if you did pushing motions on one day and pulling motions on another day.

#### PRESSING

Pressing motions are sometimes categorized as pushing motions; however, pressing typically refers to movements that are oriented more vertically, such as lifting or reaching overhead. Pressing encompasses a broad spectrum of movements but, most notably, motions that involve shoulder flexion combined with elbow extension (**Figure 21-1: 2**). Sample exercises include the dumbbell shoulder press, barbell shoulder press, push press, and Arnold press. This movement pattern places a large emphasis on the shoulder musculature, including the deltoids and trapezius muscles (**Table 21: -8**). In addition, the rotator cuff musculature must properly stabilize the glenohumeral (shoulder) joint during pressing movement patterns. Consequently, the rotator cuff, deltoids, and trapezius musculature must work together to ensure proper motion of the scapulae (shoulder blades; Lugo et al., 2008). Individuals may develop shoulder dysfunction due to many factors, such as age, work environment, exercise habits, and health status (Burbank et al., 2008; Meislin et al., 2005). As such, fitness professionals must ensure their clients’ ability to safely perform overhead pressing motions through a full range of motion that is free of pain.

**TABLE 21-8: Pressing Movement Patterns**

| Category | Description |
|---|---|
| Musculature | Deltoids, trapezius, triceps brachii, and rotator cuff |
| Concentric joint actions | Shoulders: shoulder flexion

Arms: elbow extension |
| Daily examples | Lifting objects overhead and reaching for objects in high areas |
| Exercise examples | Dumbbell shoulder press, barbell shoulder press, push press, and Arnold press |

## Images

**Figure 21-12: Seated machine shoulder press**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH21_FIGF12A.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 21-12: ). Sample exercises include the dumbbell shoulder press, barbell shoulder press, push press, and Arnold press. This movement pattern places a large emphasis on the shoulder musculature, including the deltoids and trapezius muscles (Table 21-8). In addition, the rotator cuff musculature must properly stabilize the glenohumeral (shoulder) joint during pressing movement patterns. Consequently, the rotator cuff, deltoids, and trapezius musculature must work together to ensure proper motion of the scapulae (shoulder blades; Lugo et al., 2008). Individuals may develop shoulder dysfunction due to many factors, such as age, work environment, exercise habits, and health status (Burbank et al., 2008; Meislin et al., 2005). As such, fitness professionals must ensure their clients’ ability to safely perform overhead pressing motions through a full range of motion that is free of pain.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH21_FIGF12B.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533