---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Program Design
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
In most cases, three to six microcycles form a mesocycle, depending on the client’s training schedule and goals.

A more in-depth discussion regarding the integration of the OPT model into macrocycles, mesocycles, and microcycles will be provided later in this chapter.

## Linear and Undulating Periodization

Periodization has been shown to be an effective method of program design for many fitness-related goals, and yet, to date, it is not a common practice among all fitness professionals. Periodization provides for the repeated use of different forms of training, at specific times, to elicit different adaptations in the body, such as muscular endurance, strength, and power (Evans, 2019; Lorenz et al., 2010). Periodization also aims to properly manage training more effectively, create a peak period for competition, and reduce the risk of injury and overtraining (Conlon et al., 2016; Raiola & D’Isanto, 2016; Rønnestad et al., 2019; Strohacker et al., 2015).

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

Periodization’s origins stem from athletics because athletes compete during specific times of the year. As such, strength and sport coaches use periodization to ensure athletes reach peak performance according to the athlete’s competition schedule.

Periodization can be divided into three distinct phases that lead up to competition: preparatory, competitive, and transition. The preparatory phase aims to gradually increase volume and intensity of training to peak levels prior to the competitive season. The competitive phase is the competition (in-season) period, and the aim is to keep athletes in top condition while minimizing overtraining and burnout. The transition phase (off-season) is the point where a competitive phase ends, and the athlete begins to incorporate active rest and tapers down the intensity of workouts (Lyakh et al., 2016).

### LINEAR PERIODIZATION

**Linear periodization** is a traditional method of program design that aims to gradually increase the intensity of the training load while simultaneously decreasing volume over a set period of time (da Silva et al., 2016; Mattocks et al., 2016; Pitta et al., 2019). Linear periodization is consistent in its approach and often uses predetermined timelines or protocols for exercise progression. For example, one approach uses light loads for the first 4 weeks to develop muscular endurance and joint stability prior to performing 4 weeks with moderate loads and, finally, performing 4 weeks using heavy loads to develop muscular **hypertrophy **and maximal strength, respectively. **Figure 21: -5** shows how the progression occurs over time.

## Key Terms

**Linear periodization**
A traditional method of program design that aims to gradually increase the intensity of the training load while simultaneously decreasing volume over a set period of time.

**Hypertrophy**
Enlargement of an organ or tissue; in the context of fitness, it is often used to describe the enlargement of skeletal muscle.

## Images

**Figure 21-5: Linear periodization**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH21_FIGF05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533