---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Applying the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
## Applying the OPT Model for Improving  General Sports Performance

The goal of improving general sports performance requires the client to increase overall endurance, strength, and power output. The training will need to be progressed from stabilization through the power phase of training. The following program is a general representation of how the OPT model is used for clients with the goal of improving general performance. The client can be cycled through the entire OPT model, depending on their needs and wants. However, for the typical client, Phases 1, 2, and 5 will be the most important and relevant. Because Phase 3 is dedicated to maximal hypertrophy, it may not be necessary for the goal of improving general performance. Phase 4 can be used in moderation to help increase the initial strength levels required to optimize the adaptation in Phase 5, if necessary.

**Figure 21-2: 1** shows the annual plan. The client will start January in Phase 1 to ensure proper muscle balance and endurance of the stabilization muscles. The client will remain there for approximately 4 weeks before moving on to Phase 2. Phase 1 is vital for this client because it will prepare the connective tissues and muscles for the higher demands of training to follow. Without proper preparation, the chance of injury for the athletic client increases.

**Figure 21-21Annual plan for the goal of general performance

The remainder of the annual plan shows the client cycling through Phases 1, 2, and 5. Phase 2 will promote greater overall strength endurance to prepare the client for the greater demands of Phase 5. As previously mentioned, Phase 4 can be used to increase the strength capacity of the client, but it is not vitally necessary for general performance, unless the client needs to express maximal strength capabilities. Phase 5 promotes increases in muscular strength and power, which is ideal for the expression of force in most sports.

## Images

**Figure 21-21: Annual plan for the goal of general performance**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH21_fig21.21_annual-general.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533