---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
The hip hinge requires an individual to perform hip flexion and extension from a standing position with relatively little motion through the knees or ankles, like a kettlebell swing (**Figure 21: -9**) or stiff-legged deadlift (McGill & Marshall, 2012). Most of the motion comes from the hips; however, this is different from spinal flexion, which involves rounding the spine into **kyphosis**, also known as a hunchback posture.

Although similar, there are noticeable differences between a squat movement pattern and the hip hinge, specifically related to ankle, knee, and hip motions. The squat pattern requires more ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion and knee flexion and extension, whereas the hip hinge requires increased hip flexion and extension with relatively motionless knees (the knees will have a soft bend).

As long as the client does not have specific orthopedic limitations, the hip hinge can be useful to strengthen both the anterior (rectus abdominis) and posterior core (erector spinae and gluteal complex) musculature in addition to the posterior chain leg musculature (hamstrings).

#### PULLING MOTION

Like other motions, pulling is an important lifting variation and can be used to enhance all modes of exercise programming for muscular endurance, hypertrophy, strength, and power (**Table 21: -6**). The fitness professional should incorporate pulling exercises into an exercise program to promote balance between anterior and posterior musculature. Moreover, pulling exercises for the upper body can help correct faulty postures, such as rounded shoulders and a forward head (Bae et al., 2016).

**TABLE 21-6: Pulling Movement Patterns**

| Category | Description |
|---|---|
| Musculature | Upper body: latissimus dorsi, teres major, rhomboids, trapezius, biceps brachii, and posterior deltoids |
| Concentric joint actions | Shoulders: scapular retraction, shoulder extension, and shoulder horizontal abduction
Arms: elbow flexion |
| Daily examples | Opening doors, climbing objects, and raking leaves |
| Exercise examples | Pull-ups, chin-ups, lat pulldowns, rows, and cobras |

## Key Terms

**Kyphotic/Kyphosis**
The normal curvature of the thoracic spine region, creating a convex portion of the spine.

## Images

**Figure 21-9: Kettlebell swing**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH21_fig21.9_kettlebell-swing.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533