---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
After completing self-myofascial techniques, the next step is to perform one to three static stretches. In most cases, it is best to statically stretch the same muscles targeted during self-myofascial techniques because the combination of both techniques provokes a greater relaxation and range of motion response (Fairall et al., 2017; Mohr et al., 2014; Škarabot et al., 2015). When performing static stretching, it is important to hold the stretched position for a minimum of 30 seconds to elicit optimal increases in range of motion (Behm et al., 2016; Kay & Blazevich, 2012).

Dynamic stretching is optional during a Phase 1 program; however, the inclusion of dynamic stretching within a flexibility routine is promising (Behm & Chaouachi, 2011; Behm et al., 2016; Kallerud & Gleeson, 2013; Opplert & Babault, 2018). The addition of dynamic stretches may further increase joint range of motion while also increasing the potential expression of strength and power output. If opting to include dynamic stretching, choose one set of 3 to 10 dynamic stretches using a repetition range of 10 to 15.

Similar to dynamic stretching, the inclusion of cardiorespiratory exercise is also optional. For example, if the fitness professional programs a circuit of dynamic stretches, the addition of cardiorespiratory exercise is not necessary.

#### CRITICAL

The flexibility techniques used in a Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training Program include (1) self-myofascial techniques, (2) static stretching, and (3) optional dynamic stretching.

Self-myofascial techniques and static stretching should focus on areas that have been determined as overactive during the assessment process.

### STABILIZATION LEVEL ACTIVATION

The activation techniques used within Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training include core and balance exercises. When choosing core exercises for a Phase 1 program, it is important to choose exercises that emphasize core stabilization and** intervertebral stability**. These exercises primarily target the local core muscles, such as the rotatores, multifidus, transverse abdominis, and diaphragm (refer to Chapter 16 Core Training Concepts for a review of local core muscles). To accomplish this, core exercises in this phase of training should focus on isometric contractions or use slow repetition tempos that involve little motion of the spine, depending on the nature of the exercise. An example of a slow repetition tempo is 4-2-1-1 (4-second eccentric action; 2-second isometric hold; 1-second concentric contraction; 1-second isometric hold). A review of repetition tempo is provided in Chapter 20. The volume and intensity of core exercises in this phase of training should be relatively low because the goal is to activate, versus exhaust, the local core musculature prior to more intense exercise. Choose between one and four core exercises with a repetition range of 12 to 20 and one to three sets. Using a low volume of core exercises helps promote muscle activation and prepares the body for further work without inducing undue muscular fatigue or exhaustion.

#### TRAINING TIP

Core exercises that emphasize core stabilization and intervertebral stability typically involve little motion of the spine. Examples include (but are not limited to) marching, floor bridge, ball bridge, floor prone cobra, ball cobra, plank, side plank, bird dog, Pallof press, and dead bugs.

## Key Terms

**Intervertebral stability**
Stability and support of individual spine segments.