---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Stabilization Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Stabilization Level of the OPT  Model

The first level of training in the OPT model focuses on two main adaptations: (1) development of proper movement patterns and (2) mobility and stability of the entire kinetic chain. This level of the OPT model is also designed to prepare the body for the demands of higher levels of training that follow. This period is crucial for all beginners to help instill confidence and promote adherence to an exercise program while minimizing stress experienced at higher intensities of training that could ultimately lead to burnout or injury. It is also necessary to cycle back through this level after periods focused on strength and power training to maintain a high degree of core and joint stability.

In addition, this level allows the body to actively rest and recover from more intense bouts of training. The stabilization level focuses on the following:

	- Developing proper movement patterns: squat, push, pull, press, hip hinge, and multiplanar movement

	- Acquiring basic exercise skills and proper use of exercise machines, free weights, and cardio equipment

	- Correcting muscle imbalances

	- Improving activation of the core musculature and stabilization of the spine and pelvis

	- Enhancing balance, coordination, and postural control during physical activity, exercise, and sport

	- Preventing tissue overload by preparing muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joints for the upcoming imposed demands of training

	- Improving cardiorespiratory and muscular endurance

	- Promoting client confidence and adherence to exercise

The stabilization level of training in the OPT model consists of one phase of training: Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training.

## Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training

Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training is designed to teach clients how to perform proper movement patterns, including pushing, pulling, pressing, squatting, hip hinging, and overall movement competency. In addition, Phase 1 places a focus on acquiring basic exercise skills, such as the proper use of exercise machines, free weights, and other types of exercise equipment like balance modalities and foam rollers. This is especially important to minimize injury risk for deconditioned clients or clients new to exercise. During this phase of training, fitness professionals will assist their clients in correcting muscle imbalances, improving joint range of motion, and increasing stability of the core and peripheral joints. This introductory period may take anywhere from 2 to 6 weeks, depending on the physical capabilities and experience level of the client when performing structured exercise. Progression out of this phase should be client specific based on their ability level and movement competency.

### TRAINING FUNDAMENTAL MOVEMENT PATTERNS

**Fundamental movement patterns** are a necessity for all fitness professionals to demonstrate and teach to their clients. Fitness professionals must ensure their clients’ mastery of these movement patterns to minimize injury risk and increase exercise effectiveness. Most exercises involve at least one of these movement patterns, though multiple movement patterns can be combined into a single exercise:

	- Squatting

	- Hip hinge

	- Pulling motions

	- Pushing motions

	- Pressing

	- Multiplanar movement

#### SQUAT

Whether trying to pick something up off the floor, getting low to help tie a child’s shoe, or simply sitting down and standing up from a chair, the squat movement pattern (**Figure 21: -8**) will be used in many cases throughout **activities of daily living (ADL)**.

## Key Terms

**Fundamental movement patterns**
Common and essential movements performed in daily life and are involved in exercise motions within a training session.

**Activities of daily living (ADL)**
The fundamental tasks needed to manage basic self-care activities, such as bathing, dressing, grooming, meal preparation and feeding, and homemaking.

## Images

**Figure 21-8: Barbell squat**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH21_FIGF08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533