---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Program Design
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
It determines the forms of training to be used, how long it will take, how often it will change, and what specific exercises will be performed. Training plans are unique to each client, and fitness professionals are discouraged from using cookie-cutter exercise programs or plans. Understanding the importance of designing safe and effective programs using **acute variable** manipulation is essential information for all fitness professionals to possess.

### PERIODIZATION FUNDAMENTALS

Fitness and sport-performance programming are based on the concept of **periodization**. Periodization (or planned fitness training) is a systematic approach to program design that exploits the general adaptation syndrome and principle of specificity (discussed in Chapter 20) to vary the amount and type of stress placed on the body to produce adaptation and prevent injury. Periodization varies the focus of a training program at regularly planned periods of time to encourage optimal adaptation (Evans, 2019; Lorenz et al., 2010). Periodization involves two primary objectives:

	- Dividing the training program into distinct periods (or phases) of training: annual training plan (macrocycle), monthly training plan (mesocycle), and weekly or daily training plan (microcycle)

	- Training different forms of strength in each period (or phase) to control training volume and to prevent injury

#### ANNUAL PLAN (MACROCYCLE)

An annual training plan, or macrocycle, shows how the training program will progress for the long term, from month to month, to meet the desired goal. It outlines specified training schedules, projected fitness evaluation sessions, and planned recovery periods (Williams et al., 2017).  In other words, macrocycles provide a bird’s-eye view of the entire year’s training regimen. This gives the client a clear representation of how the fitness professional plans to get the client to their goal.

## Key Terms

**Acute variables**
Important components that specify how each exercise is to be performed; also known as exercise training variables.

**Periodization**
Macromanagement or planned manipulation of training variables in an organized fashion to improve performance over time.