---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Applying the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
From March on, Phases 1, 2, and 5 are used in the same month and week. Undulating periodization allows the client to train at various intensities during the course of a week, eliciting multiple adaptations once a certain level of fitness is achieved (Grgic et al., 2017). In this program, stabilization (Phase 1), strength (Phase 2), and power (Phase 5) are all being trained together. Cardio can be done on the workout days (or any other day during the week, depending on the client’s schedule). It is important not to perform high-intensity cardiorespiratory exercise the same day as a high-intensity OPT workout. Rather a high-intensity OPT workout (Phase 5) should be paired with a low-intensity cardio program. Conversely, a high-intensity cardio program should be paired with a low-intensity OPT workout (Phase 1).

**Figure 21-2: 2** illustrates the monthly plan for January. This plan demonstrates a 3-day-per-week workout plan with scheduled total-body workouts on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. Cardio can be done on the workout days (or any other day during the week, depending on the client’s schedule).

**Figure 21-22General performance monthly plan: January

**Figure 21-2: 3** illustrates the monthly plan for February. As with the previous month, this plan demonstrates a 3-day-per-week workout plan with scheduled total-body workouts on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. This monthly plan could easily be four times per week with a split routine for the body parts. Cardio can be done on the workout days (or any other day during the week, depending on the client’s schedule).

**Figure 21-23General performance monthly plan: February

## Images

**Figure 21-22: General performance monthly plan: January**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20CH21_fig21.22_general-jan.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 21-23: General performance monthly plan: February**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20CH21_fig21.23_general_feb.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533