---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Strength Level of the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
## Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training

Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training focuses on increasing the load placed on the tissues of the body. In other words, Phase 4 requires the exerciser to lift progressively heavier loads near or at maximal intensity. Maximal intensity improves recruitment of more motor units and rate of force production.

While this can be viewed as an optional phase for some clients, maximal strength training has also been shown to help increase the benefits of power training used in Phase 5. Because the goal of this phase of training is primarily maximal strength, the fitness professional will want to increase intensity (load) and the number of sets performed for each exercise. As the client trains with heavier loads, repetition ranges will decrease, and rest periods will likely need to increase to help ensure full restoration of ATP. A client in this category will generally stay in this phase of training for a 2- to 6-week duration before cycling back through earlier phases or progressing on to Phase 5. This phase is optional because some clients may not seek maximal strength adaptations.

## Designing Strength Level Programs

Phases 2 through 4 of the OPT model use the same workout template as Phase 1; yet, the acute training variables will be different, and exercise selections are more advanced.

### STRENGTH LEVEL WARM-UP

The flexibility techniques used in Phases 2 through 4 include (1) self-myofascial techniques, such as foam rolling; (2) active stretching; and (3) optional dynamic stretching. When performing self-myofascial techniques, choose one to three muscle groups to target, and hold on each tender area for a minimum of 30 seconds to elicit an optimal relaxation response. After completing self-myofascial techniques, the next step is to perform one to three active stretches. Active stretches require 5 to 10 repetitions in which the stretched position is only held for 1 to 2 seconds. If opting to include dynamic stretching, choose one set of 3 to 10 dynamic stretches using a repetition range of 10 to 15.

Similar to Phase 1, cardiorespiratory exercise is an optional component of a client’s warm-up. If including cardiorespiratory exercise, the intensity should be rather low and last between 5 and 10 minutes.

#### HELPFUL HINT

A Phase 1 flexibility routine involves self-myofascial techniques, static stretching, and optional dynamic stretching. However, in Phases 2 through 4, the flexibility routine is progressed, and flexibility techniques include self-myofascial techniques, active stretching, and optional dynamic stretching.

### STRENGTH LEVEL ACTIVATION

Similar to Phase 1, the activation techniques used within Phases 2 through 4 include core and balance exercises. However, the exercises should ideally be a progression from those used previously. To accomplish this, core exercises should involve more dynamic eccentric and concentric movements of the spine throughout a full range of motion. In other words, these exercises involve flexion, extension, and rotation of the trunk with slightly faster tempos. Choose between one and four core exercises, using a repetition range of 8 to 12 and two to four sets using a moderate repetition tempo.