---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Introduction to Proprioceptive Modalities
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Proprioceptive Modalities

Proprioception is the ability to sense body position and limb movements and is an important component of balance. A fundamental component of proprioception is the ability to maintain postural control or balance to help reduce the risk of injury and increase performance measures. Balance and stability training using a variety of proprioceptive modalities can be an effective strategy for optimizing movement patterns, joint stability, and performance (Willardson, 2004).

## Stability Balls

Stability balls, also known as Swiss balls, are frequently used in a variety of training facilities with a wide range of populations. The Swiss physical therapist Dr. Susanne Klein-Vogelbach (1990) popularized the use of stability balls for adults with a variety of orthopedic problems. American physical therapists began to observe and apply these techniques, referring to the training implements as Swiss balls (Carrière, 1998). These balls are most often made of soft polyvinylchloride and can come in a variety of sizes (**Table 22: -3**). Their primary use is to increase the demand for stability in an exercise, but they can also be used to reinforce proper posture during squatting movements.

**TABLE 22-3: Stability Ball Size Chart**

| Height | Suggested Size* |
|---|---|
| ≤5'0" tall | 45 cm |
| 5'1" to 5'7" | 55 cm |
| 5'8" to 6' | 65 cm |
| >6' | 75 cm |
| *These are suggested sizes. Individuals should select a ball size that allows them to comfortably sit on top of the ball with their hips and knees bent at a 90-degree angle and their feet flat on the floor. |