---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Elastic Resistance and Medicine Balls
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Elastic bands come in a variety of colors, shapes, and thicknesses. A color-coding system is used to identify differences in the thickness of rubber and thus the resistance of elastic tubing and bands. Elastic resistance works like a rubber band—the greater the thickness of the tubing, the more resistant it will be to stretch, thus greater force will be required to stretch it. Rarely should the elastic band be stretched longer than 250% of its resting length (Page & Ellenbecker, 2003). If the resistance provided by the elastic band is not enough, then the individual will need to progress to either a thicker band or use two pieces of tubing of the same medium resistance. It is important to note that thicker tubing will reach its elastic limit sooner in the movement than thinner or medium thickness tubing. This can affect one’s ability to perform the movement in a full range of motion. This may also cause too much stress at certain joint positions. Thus, in some cases, using two pieces of medium resistance may be a better solution as a progression.

One of the problems with elastic tubing or bands is that the resistance in rubber changes as it is being stretched through a full range of motion. For example, the amount of resistance from the start of a tubing biceps curl compared with the end of a tubing biceps curl can vary significantly, meaning the resistance is not constant (**Figure 22: -7**). The mechanical stretch properties of elastic tubing vary according to its thickness, age, how often it is used, and how quickly the rubber is stretched. Consequently, it is difficult to know the exact resistance of each elastic tube or band used. Although precise quantification of resistance using color-coded bands is not possible in a fitness setting, research studies have accurately developed linear equations to predict force at different stages of elongation (Thomas et al., 2005). It should be noted that each manufacturer of elastic tubing and bands uses different color-coding systems, so it is important to review the color-coding system when using different brands of elastic resistance training equipment to ensure the correct resistance is selected. It should also be noted that studies have shown that there are inconsistencies in band tension from manufacturer to manufacturer (Fuentes et al., 2019).

Because elastic resistance is so versatile, fitness professionals frequently use elastic resistance with their clients in a variety of settings, including health clubs, boot camps, athletic performance centers, and rehabilitation clinics.

## Images

**Figure 22-7: Tubing biceps curl**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF07A.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 22-7: ). The mechanical stretch properties of elastic tubing vary according to its thickness, age, how often it is used, and how quickly the rubber is stretched. Consequently, it is difficult to know the exact resistance of each elastic tube or band used. Although precise quantification of resistance using color-coded bands is not possible in a fitness setting, research studies have accurately developed linear equations to predict force at different stages of elongation (Thomas et al., 2005). It should be noted that each manufacturer of elastic tubing and bands uses different color-coding systems, so it is important to review the color-coding system when using different brands of elastic resistance training equipment to ensure the correct resistance is selected. It should also be noted that studies have shown that there are inconsistencies in band tension from manufacturer to manufacturer (Fuentes et al., 2019).**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF07B.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533