---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Sandbags, ViPR, and Battle Ropes
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
## Battle Ropes

Another tool that has gained popularity within fitness are battle ropes (**Figure 22-2: 3**). Often referred to as fitness ropes or training ropes, battle ropes can provide a high-intensity workout, delivering full-body conditioning while increasing overall cardiovascular benefits (Fountaine & Schmidt, 2015). Battle ropes are made of heavy-duty nylon and come in a variety of lengths and thickness, the most common sizes being 1.0, 1.5, and 2 in. (2.5– 5 cm) in diameter and lengths of 30, 40, and 50 ft (9, 12, 15 m). Rope weight will vary depending on the thickness and length of the ropes. Fifty-foot ropes are arguably the most common length. Thinner diameter ropes weigh less and are recommended for those new to exercise, smaller in stature, or have smaller hands or weaker grip strength. Larger ropes are heavier and are ideal for experienced individuals or for those seeking development of strength and power.

Battle rope exercises are considered a low-impact activity, which means they provide minimal impact on the joints. Battle ropes require activation of the prime movers, require engagement of the stabilizing musculature and core, and increase metabolic demands. Battle ropes also allow the user to perform unilateral and bilateral movements (Calatayud et. al, 2015).

### TRAINING TIP

Smaller ropes (1.0–1.5 in. in diameter) are used primarily for aerobic and muscular endurance adaptations in which exercises are performed for 30 seconds or more. Heavier ropes (2 in. in diameter) are best used for strength, power, and anaerobic adaptations in which exercises are performed for 30 seconds or less.

## Images

**Figure 22-23: Battle rope**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF23.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533