---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Kettlebell and Bodyweight Training
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
## Kettlebell Training

© Lunopark/Shutterstock.

A kettlebell is a flat-bottomed cast iron ball with a handle. It was first used as a unit of measurement on market and farming scales and later used in the Russian military for conditioning and strength. The giyra, Russian for kettlebell, ranges from very low weight (e.g., 5 lb), to competition style weight, more than 140 lb (64 kg), and higher weights exist. A kettlebell differs from a dumbbell, barbell, or medicine ball in that the center of mass is away from the handle, which may require more strength and coordination, as well as increased recruitment from stabilizers and prime movers simultaneously during particular movements. This is especially true of swing-type movements, the foundation for all kettlebell training (**Figure 22-1: 3**). Whether using a two-handed, single-arm, hand-to-hand grip or release-and-catch movement, the variety of positions and movement options allows for increased skill, coordination, strength, and power. All variations permit the user to transform dynamic force reduction into powerful force production for a fun, challenging, and effective workout.

### BENEFITS OF KETTLEBELL TRAINING

The benefits of kettlebell training are numerous and applicable for individuals who wish to increase all aspects of health and fitness and for professional and Olympic athletes. Such benefits include the following:

	- Enhanced athleticism, coordination, and balance

	- Increased mental focus and physical stamina

	- Increased oxygen uptake

	- Increased total body conditioning versus isolation training

	- Recruitment of the posterior chain (calves, hamstring complex, gluteal muscles, spinal erectors)

	- Increased core stability and muscular endurance

	- Increased strength and power

	- Improved grip strength

	- Increased metabolic demands and caloric expenditure (Chen et al., 2018; Falatic et al., 2015; Manocchia et al., 2010)

## Images

**Figure 22-13: ). Whether using a two-handed, single-arm, hand-to-hand grip or release-and-catch movement, the variety of positions and movement options allows for increased skill, coordination, strength, and power. All variations permit the user to transform dynamic force reduction into powerful force production for a fun, challenging, and effective workout.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_UNNUN05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 22-13: Single-arm kettlebell swing**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF13A.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 22-13: ). Whether using a two-handed, single-arm, hand-to-hand grip or release-and-catch movement, the variety of positions and movement options allows for increased skill, coordination, strength, and power. All variations permit the user to transform dynamic force reduction into powerful force production for a fun, challenging, and effective workout.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH22_FIGF13B.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533