---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Osteoporosis and Arthritis
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
It used to be common practice for arthritic patients to avoid exercise; however, research on the effects of training on the symptoms of arthritis has led to a shift in that thinking (Ahmed, 2011; Kim et al., 2018). Some research shows that strength-training programs provide relief from arthritic symptoms, whereas others have shown decreased muscle inhibition and increased muscle strength in patients with moderate muscle inhibition (Messier et al., 2013). Therefore, individuals with arthritis are advised to participate in a regular exercise program for increasing stabilization and strength while also increasing activities of daily living. In spite of the risks associated with exercise in clients with arthritis, it is very important in restoring functional mobility and endurance in a deconditioned client who has joint limitations secondary to arthritis. Symptoms of arthritis (such as joint pain and stiffness) are heightened through inactivity as a result of muscle **atrophy **and lack of tissue flexibility. Progressing exercises so that they are performed in the seated position (without support) and standing position will increase functional capacity and balance of clients.

A methodical approach is important in the assessment and activity recommendations to reduce symptoms of flare-ups. Follow the guidelines for assessment in Chapters 11 and 12 and note the pain-free range of motion that clients exhibit during these assessments. Improving muscle strength and enhancing flexibility through exercise can assist in decreasing symptoms associated with arthritis. Static and active forms of stretching can be used and may be better tolerated from a seated or standing position. The use of self-myofascial techniques can be used if tolerated. Cardiorespiratory training should begin at a moderate level (40–65% HR~max~) and progress as tolerated depending on the client’s capabilities and a physician’s advice. Core and balance exercises will be very important for this population to increase levels of joint stability and balance. Plyometric training is not recommended for arthritic clients. Light resistance training with modified repetitions (10 to 12), to avoid heavy, repetitive joint loading that increases stress to the affected joints, is appropriate.

## Key Terms

**Atrophy**
The wasting away or decrease in size of body tissue.