---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Obesity
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Obesity

**Obesity **is the fastest growing health problem in America and in most all other industrialized countries. In fact, obesity has nearly tripled worldwide since 1975 (World Health Organization, 2018b). At present, 72% of Americans older than the age of 20 years are either **overweight **or obese. Approximately 40% of Americans aged 20 years and older are obese (Hruby & Hu, 2015). Obesity is a complex disease and can be associated with a variety of chronic health conditions as well as emotional and social problems.

## Body Mass Index

Body mass index (BMI) is used to estimate healthy body-weight ranges based on a person’s height. Because it is simple to measure and calculate, it is the most widely used assessment tool to identify individuals who are underweight, overweight, and obese. BMI is defined as total body weight in kilograms divided by the height in meters squared. For example, a client with a body weight of 200 lb (91 kg) and height of 70 in. (178 cm, or 3.16 m^2^) would have a BMI of 28.79 (91 kg/3.16 m^2^). Because BMI does not actually measure body fat percentage, other techniques, such as bioelectrical impedance or circumference measurements, may be performed to assist in developing realistic weight-loss goals and to help provide feedback to clients. These techniques, however, may need to be avoided for obese individuals because assessing body fat can be a sensitive situation. Although BMI is not a perfect measurement, it does provide reliable values for comparison and for reasonable goal setting. For example, once BMI is calculated, realistic goals can be set to achieve a weight associated with a lower BMI. A BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 is considered within normal limits, 25 to 29.9 is considered overweight, and a BMI of 30 or greater is obese (**Table 23: -5**). The risk of chronic disease increases in proportion to the rise in BMI in both adults and adolescents.

**TABLE 23-5: Body Mass Index**

| BMI | Disease Risk | Classification |
|---|---|---|
| <18.5 | Increased | Underweight |
| 18.5–24.9 | Low | Healthy weight |
| 25.0–29.9 | Increased | Overweight |
| 30–34.9 | High | Obese |
| 35.0–39.9 | Very high | Obesity II |
| ≥40 | Extremely high | Obesity III |

## Causes of Obesity

Although the causes of obesity are complex and varied, few disagree that the primary physiological problem is energy balance (too many calories consumed and too few expended). Because obesity is such a complex medical problem, it is important for fitness professionals to work closely with a registered dietitian (or other qualified licensed professional) who can provide accurate and achievable dietary recommendations.

## Key Terms

**Obesity**
A complex disease involving an excessive amount of body fat; classified by a body mass index of 30 or greater.

**Overweight**
A body weight greater than what is considered within normal standards; a body mass index of 25.0 to 29.9.