---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Age Considerations
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Older Adults

By the middle of this century, it is estimated that 87 million people—or roughly 21% of the entire U.S. population—will be 65 years of age or older (Ortman et al., 2014). Globally, the number of people aged 60 years or older is approximately 962 million, more than twice the number when compared to 1980 (Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2017). As populations age, dealing with issues such as **mortality**, longevity, and quality of life becomes a greater focus. The upward drift in average age has significant implications for fitness professionals as well. As the role of exercise to help improve and maintain functional independence becomes more widely known and accepted, opportunities for Certified Personal Trainers will continue to increase.

Aging is synonymous with degeneration and loss of functional ability in older adults. Typical forms of degeneration associated with aging include osteoporosis, arthritis, degenerative low-back pain, and obesity (Demontiero et al., 2012). Special considerations for those chronic conditions associated with aging will be addressed later; however, considerations for apparently healthy older adults help provide the fitness professional with the fundamental knowledge to effectively evaluate and design programs for this population.

It is vital to note that various physiologic changes are considered normal with aging, and some are considered pathologic, meaning related to disease. For example, blood pressure tends to be higher at rest and during exercise, which can be the result of either natural causes, as a result of disease, or a combination of both. **Arteriosclerosis **is a normal physiologic process of aging that results in arteries that are less elastic and pliable, which in turn leads to greater resistance to blood flow and thus higher blood pressure (hypertension), which will be discussed later in this chapter. On the other hand, **atherosclerosis**—caused largely by poor lifestyle choices—restricts blood flow as a result of plaque buildup within the walls of arteries thus leading to increased resistance and blood pressure.

Another disease-related cause of hypertension is peripheral vascular disease, which refers to plaques that form in any peripheral artery, typically those of the lower leg. Individuals with diagnosed hypertension should be carefully monitored and referred to a physician if their blood pressure continues to rise or if they have other risk factors for heart disease. All individuals— regardless of their age—who are hypertensive should be referred to a physician for further evaluation. The American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association have updated blood pressure guidelines to state normal blood pressure to be less than 120/80 mm Hg. Elevated blood pressure is 120–129 mm Hg systolic and less than 80 mm Hg diastolic. Stage 1 hypertension is now 130 to 139 mm Hg systolic or 80 to 89 mm Hg diastolic, whereas stage 2 hypertension is now 140 mm Hg or higher (systolic) or 90 mmHg or higher (diastolic). A hypertensive crisis involves a systolic reading greater than 180 mm Hg and/or a diastolic reading greater than 120 mm Hg. All blood pressure measurements should be obtained on at least two different occasions by a knowledgeable health professional (American College of Cardiology, 2017).

Despite the normal decline in physiologic functioning associated with aging, older adults— with and without other chronic health conditions—can and do respond to exercise much in the same manner as apparently healthy younger adults. Some of the normal physiologic and functional changes associated with aging include reductions in the following:

	- Maximum attainable heart rate

	- Cardiac output

	- Muscle mass

	- Balance

	- Coordination (neuromuscular efficiency)

	- Connective tissue elasticity

	- Bone mineral density

	- Anabolic hormones

## Key Terms

**Mortality**
A state or a risk of death or dying.

**Arteriosclerosis**
A general term that refers to the hardening and loss of elasticity of arteries.

**Atherosclerosis**
The processes by which plaque is formed in arteries leading to reduced blood flow.