---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Hypertension and Coronary Heart Disease
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
In some cases, clients with CHD will begin a fitness program after completing a cardiac rehabilitation program. Regardless of whether a client with CHD has completed a cardiac rehabilitation program or not, fitness professionals must have a clear understanding about the client’s disease, medication use, and most importantly, the safe upper limit of exercise—and any other restrictions—imposed by the client’s physician. Fitness professionals must not compromise on obtaining this information, and client participation must not proceed until the information is received. In many cases, the client can facilitate obtaining this information.

Clients should be able to find and monitor their own pulse rate or use an accurate heart rate monitor to stay below their safe upper limit of exercise. In addition, clients should be instructed on other signs and symptoms of tolerance to exercise, including shortness of breath, dizziness, and excessive fatigue. It is important to note that the heart rate response to exercise in this population can vary considerably from age-predicted formulas and will often be lower. Although signs and symptoms should always supersede all else as a sign to decrease or stop exercising, signs and symptoms vary greatly among individuals with CHD, so careful monitoring of heart rate and signs of worsening CHD, like angina, become increasingly important. Other useful tools to assess exercise intensity are rating of perceived exertion (**Table 23-1: 3**) or the talk test, which allows fitness professionals to gauge the intensity of the exercise without having to assess heart rate.

**TABLE 23-13: Rating of Perceived Exertion**

| Rating | Perceived Exertion Level |
|---|---|
| 0 | No exertion, at rest |
| 1 | Very light |
| 2-3 | Light |
| 4-5 | Moderate, somewhat hard |
| 6-7 | High, vigorous |
| 8-9 | Very hard |
| 10 | Maximum effort, highest possible |

Clients with stable coronary artery disease—especially those who have participated in a cardiac rehabilitation program—should know or be taught information on the importance and benefits of exercise, which include a lower risk of mortality, increased exercise tolerance, muscle strength, reduction in angina and heart failure symptoms, and improved psychological status and social adjustment. There is also evidence that heart disease may be slowed (or even reversed) when a multifactor intervention program of intensive education, exercise, counseling, and lipid-lowering medications is used, as appropriate (Maruthur et al., 2009; Pischkeet al., 2008).