---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Osteoporosis and Arthritis
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Fitness professionals should also monitor the progress of clients with arthritis to assess the effects of the exercise program on joint pain. Pain persisting for more than 1 hour after exercise is an indication that the exercise should be modified or eliminated from the routine. Moreover, exercises of higher intensity or involving high repetitions should be avoided to decrease joint aggravation. In that regard, a low-volume circuit program or multiple session format is suitable for clients with arthritis (**Table 23-1: 8**).

**TABLE 23-18: Basic Exercise Guidelines for Individuals with Arthritis**

| Mode | Treadmill walking, stationary cycling, rowers, and low-impact or step aerobics |
|---|---|
| Frequency | 3–5 days per week |
| Intensity | Low to moderate intensity (40% to 65% HRmax) and progress as tolerated depending on the client’s capabilities |
| Duration | 30 minutes |
| Assessment | Pushing assessment

Pulling assessment

Overhead squat assessment (if tolerated) |
| Flexibility | Static, active, and controlled dynamic stretches |
| Resistance Training | 1–3 sets of 10–12 repetitions, 2–3 days per week

May use a circuit or PHA training system |
| Special Considerations | Avoid heavy lifting and high repetitions. However, high repetitions with low load may be appropriate.

Stay in pain-free ranges of motion.

Start out with only 5 minutes of exercise, if needed, and progressively increase, depending on the severity of conditions. |

Fitness professionals need to be aware of the medications being taken by clients with arthritis. Clients taking oral corticosteroids, particularly over time, may have osteoporosis, increased body mass, and if there is a history of gastrointestinal bleeding, anemia (low number of red blood cells). Corticosteroids also increase fracture risk. Research indicates that people with osteoarthritis have a decrease in strength, proprioception, and mobility. Research has shown that individuals with arthritis have a decreased ability to balance while standing and that a loss in knee-extensor strength is a strong predictor of osteoarthritis (Glass et al., 2013). Furthermore, researchers have shown that patients with osteoarthritis exhibit increased muscle inhibition of knee extensors (quadriceps) and were not able to effectively activate their knee-extensor musculature to optimal levels (Ahmed, 2011; Hu et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2018). Balance and muscle strength are vital components of walking, and therefore any deficit in these areas could potentially have a negative effect on one’s ability to exercise and perform activities of daily living. This claim was supported by a study that showed a significant decrease in dynamic balance for elderly people who had a history of falling (Rice et al., 2014).