---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Healthcare Continuum
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
## Allied Health Professionals

In many cases, fitness professionals are the bridge between licensed healthcare providers and clients. Certified Personal Trainers serve an important role in helping develop and implement safe and effective training programs alongside other healthcare providers. It is important for fitness professionals to develop a working knowledge of the types of healthcare professionals they may work with in the future. Networking with other allied health professionals can be vital in building a thriving fitness business, because each can refer to the other for their respective services and build a community their clients can trust. Certified Personal Trainers will often network with the following allied health professionals:

	- *Physical therapists*. A physical therapist is a practitioner who is educated in many areas of physical rehabilitation. Physical therapists can work in many settings such as hospitals, rehabilitation centers, nursing homes, schools, and fitness or sports conditioning facilities to help individuals return to regular activity following an injury.

	- *Athletic trainers*. An athletic trainer often works alongside physicians, emergency medical technicians, and other healthcare providers to help diagnose and treat injuries. Many athletic trainers work with sports teams as part of the sports medicine staff; however, athletic trainers can also work in a variety of fitness-related settings or schools.

	- *Chiropractors*. A chiropractor is a licensed healthcare professional who primarily deals with conditions relating to spinal alignment. Chiropractors use manual manipulation of the vertebrae to help alleviate nervous system dysfunction because all nerves in the body connect to the spinal cord.