---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Evidence of Muscular Dysfunction and Increased Injury
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### KNEE DYSFUNCTION

Knee pain is a common complaint that can affect anyone regardless of age or level of physical activity. Possible causes of knee pain include arthritis, acute (sudden onset) injuries, and overuse (repetitive) injuries. Arguably, three of the most common knee injuries include **patellar tendonitis**, **anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears**, and **medial collateral ligament (MCL) tears**. Some forms of chronic knee pain are also associated with being overweight or obese and a lack of regular physical activity (Frilander et al., 2016).

It is important for fitness professionals to have a basic understanding of proper knee alignment and posture, as well as ways to monitor exercise technique to minimize the risk of injury. Many common types of knee injuries and disorders can be prevented with proper exercise technique, supportive footwear, and modifications to exercise and physical activity as necessary. Regular flexibility and strength training plans with the inclusion of a comprehensive warm-up component can help significantly reduce the incidence of knee injuries (Park et al., 2018).

### LUMBO-PELVIC-HIP COMPLEX DYSFUNCTION

The lumbo-pelvic-hip complex (LPHC) is made up of the lumbar spine (low-back area), pelvis, abdomen, and hip musculoskeletal structures and is commonly referred to as “the core.” The LPHC is an important anatomical structure because it connects the upper and lower halves of a person’s body. Increasing strength and stability of the LPHC is important for improvements in health, sports performance, and prevention of injuries because an unstable core limits the ability of the limbs to properly produce force and predisposes an individual to back or hip pain (De Blaiser et al., 2018; Granacher et al., 2013; Hewett et al., 2005; Richardson et al., 2002). In fact, nearly 80% of adults experience some form of low-back pain at least once during their lifetime (Nam, 2011). As such, fitness professionals must have working knowledge of the muscles that make up the core and design fitness programs that increase core stability and strength.

## Key Terms

**Patellar tendonitis**
An injury or inflammation of the tendon that connects the patella (kneecap) to the tibia (shin bone).

**Anterior  cruciate  ligament (ACL) tear**
A stretch, partial tear, or complete tear of the anterior cruciate ligament of the knee.

**Medial collateral ligament (MCL) tear**
A stretch, partial tear, or complete tear of the medial collateral ligament of the knee.