---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Welcome to NASM
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### INTEGRATED TRAINING AND THE OPT MODEL

The NASM proprietary approach to exercise training, the Optimum Performance Training (OPT) model (**Figure 1-2**), was developed with evidence-based practice as a core guiding philosophy. The OPT model is backed by scientific research (Distefano et al., 2013) and has been successful for many types of clients, including those seeking weight loss or improvements in health, strength, muscle mass, or athletic performance.

Exercise training programs need to address all components of health-related physical fitness while using scientifically recognized training principles. Unfortunately, some training programs are not based on sound principles and guidelines. Instead, they rely solely on the experience of celebrities, fitness enthusiasts, or athletes who do not possess a formal education or background in exercise science. It is vital for exercise programs to be rooted in science and to address the needs of the whole person in a holistic manner.

For example, the condition of a person’s **musculoskeletal system** is directly related to the potential risk of injury; the more **deconditioned** a person is, the greater the risk of injury becomes. It is important to note that deconditioned does not simply mean that a person gets out of breath when climbing a flight of stairs or that they are **overweight**. Being deconditioned is a state in which a person may have a combination of **muscle imbalances**, poor flexibility, insufficient endurance, or limited **joint stability**. All of these conditions can greatly inhibit the ability of the human body to produce proper movement and can eventually lead to injury.

The personal training industry continues to grow dramatically, especially regarding the ability of fitness professionals to work with individuals with chronic health conditions or musculoskeletal impairments. While athletes do represent a portion of a fitness professional’s typical clientele, many clients who seek out personal training services are physically inactive and deconditioned.

## Key Terms

**Musculoskeletal system**
The combined, interworking system of all muscles and bones in the body.

**Deconditioned**
A state of lost physical fitness, which may include muscle imbalances, decreased flexibility, and a lack of core and joint stability.

**Overweight**
A body weight greater than what is considered within normal standards; a body mass index of 25.0 to 29.9.

**Muscle imbalance**
When muscles on each side of a joint have altered length-tension relationships.

**Joint stability**
The support provided by tissues surrounding a joint to maintain and provide control during movement.

## Images

**Figure 1-2: The OPT model**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH01_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533