---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Evidence of Muscular Dysfunction and Increased Injury
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
## Evidence of Muscular Dysfunction  and Increased Injury

**Skeletal muscle** development and maintenance is vital to ensure optimal health and well-being across the life span of all individuals. Skeletal muscle tissue accounts for a significant amount of overall body mass and supports freedom of movement within the environment. In addition to the increased risk and occurrence of chronic diseases, too much sitting and physical inactivity can also cause dysfunction in our body’s muscular and skeletal systems, which can lead to an increased risk of injury and instances of low-back, shoulder, and neck pain (Law & Sluka, 2017; Owen et al., 2010; Thorp et al., 2011).

### FOOT AND ANKLE DYSFUNCTION

Foot and ankle injuries can severely limit and impact normal activities of daily living (Chinn & Hertel, 2010). Two of the most common issues at the foot and ankle complex include ankle **sprains **and **plantar fasciitis**. An ankle sprain occurs when a person’s ankle is rolled, twisted, or turned, which results in the stretching or tearing of the ligaments that hold the bones of the ankle together and connect it to the foot and the lower leg. Plantar fasciitis involves inflammation of the tissue on the bottom of the foot that connects the heel bone to the toes (i.e., the plantar fascia) and often results in chronic heel pain.

The feet and ankles support the entire body; as a result, impairments to the foot and ankle complex may cause dysfunction to other regions of the body such as the knees, hips, or lower back (Menz et al., 2013; Riskowski et al., 2013). Additionally, if someone has previously injured their ankle, there is a far greater risk of injuring it again if work has not been done to properly condition it back to a strong and stable place (Fulton et al., 2014). This makes it highly important for fitness professionals to monitor the posture of their clients’ feet and ankles during exercise so they can better develop proper movement patterns.

## Key Terms

**Skeletal muscle**
The type of muscle tissue that connects to bones and generates the forces that create movement.

**Sprain**
A stretching or tearing of ligaments.

**Plantar fasciitis**
An inflammation of the fibrous tissue (plantar fascia) along the bottom of the foot, which often results in intense heel pain.