---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Modern State of Health and Fitness
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Physical Inactivity and Its Relationship to Chronic Disease
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
### HEART DISEASE

*Cardiovascular diseas*e is a broad term describing numerous problems of the heart and blood vessels and includes conditions such as **strokes**,** heart attacks**, **heart failure**, **heart valve problems**, and **arrhythmias**. The most common root cause of these conditions is** ischemic heart disease** (Benjamin et al., 2017). Ischemic heart disease is characterized by the narrowing of coronary arteries, which supply blood and oxygen to the heart, and is what is most commonly being referred to when discussing heart disease.

**Atherosclerosis **(**Figure 1-7**) is the process by which plaque is formed in the arteries, leading to reduced blood flow to the heart or brain. Atherosclerosis is the most common type of heart disease that can directly result in heart attacks and strokes. It is usually caused by the presence of a combination of risk factors, such as tobacco use, obesity, physical inactivity, harmful use of alcohol or drugs, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, type 2 diabetes, chronic stress, and poor diet.

While chronic disease as a whole is extremely costly for every population around the globe, the proportion due to heart disease alone is staggering; it is the number one cause of death, accounting for more loss of life than any other chronic disease (Finegold et al., 2013). However, it is also highly preventable. Studies have consistently demonstrated that individuals who maintain their aerobic fitness through regular and sustained exercise over the course of their lifetimes reduce their risk for developing heart disease (Brunjes et al., 2017; Kokkinos, 2012; Warburton et al., 2006).

In addition, for those diagnosed with a heart condition, habitual exercise appears to reduce the risk of additional cardiac events—including heart attacks—and is an important component of secondary prevention (Darden et al., 2013).

## Key Terms

**Stroke**
A sudden lack of blood supply to the brain, caused by either a blockage in an artery or ruptured blood vessel.

**Heart attack**
The action that occurs when an artery supplying the heart with blood and oxygen becomes blocked; medically known as a myocardial infarction.

**Heart failure**
A condition in which the heart can’t pump enough blood to meet the body’s needs.

**Heart valve problem**
A condition that occurs when one or more heart valves do not function properly, causing shortness of breath and reduced oxygen supply to the body.

**Arrhythmia**
A problem with the rate or rhythm of a person’s heartbeat. The heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern.

**Ischemic heart disease**
A category of heart-related problems caused by the narrowing of coronary arteries, which supply blood and oxygen to the heart muscle.

**Atherosclerosis**
The processes by which plaque is formed in arteries leading to reduced blood flow.

## Images

**Figure 1-7: Atherosclerosis**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH01_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533