---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: A Day in the Life
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
Group workout programs often base compensation on the number of participants; the more people in a group workout, the more money that professional can earn per hour. Coaching group workouts during times when the most clients are available is one way for fitness professionals to increase income while also improving work–life balance.

## Operations

Working as a Certified Personal Trainer includes numerous business tasks in addition to directly training clients, such as reviewing assessment or intake forms, preparing invoices and collecting payments, developing or updating exercise programs, making follow-up phone calls, writing emails, or sending text messages to schedule and confirm appointments. Managing a day’s operations tasks takes time, but it is highly necessary to keep new **prospects** coming in and existing clients coming back.

Employers also typically require specific duties to be performed around the facility when a fitness professional is not working with clients. These duties could include circulating on the fitness floor to provide assistance to all members, cleaning gym equipment, putting away equipment left out by members, working external events (health conferences, street markets), or helping the membership team at the front desk.

When working with clients, fitness professionals should establish specific hours that they are available to see clients and adhere to this schedule for consistency. It is important to begin and end client sessions or group workouts on time so that one session or group workout does not overlap with another. Clients pay for a set amount of time; if the client is late, the session should still end on time and not run into the next. For independent fitness professionals traveling to different locations to lead workouts, it will be necessary to factor in commute times and plan for traffic.

## Key Terms

**Prospect**
An individual who has been identified as a potential client.