---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Marketing
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
**Table 2-4** outlines what a Four P's marketing plan could look like for an independent personal trainer.

**TABLE 2-4 Sample Marketing Plan**

| Marketing Plan: Jane Doe’s Epic Personal Training |
|---|
| Product: Jane Doe’s Epic Personal Training

Jane offers in-home personal training services to women who want to learn how to strength train safely and effectively.

Price: Jane charges clients a flat monthly rate based on whether clients want one, two, or three sessions per week of live personal training (4, 8, or 12 times a month).

Place: Jane offers in-home personal training in a specific neighborhood of a large city, including apartments and offices that have workout facilities where Jane can work with her clients.

Promotion: Jane starts a blog and social media feed to focus on strength training advice for women to grow her business. She also relies on word-of-mouth referrals from existing clients. |

### SOCIAL MEDIA

From one point of view, each of the various social media platforms appears as if it was designed specifically for fitness professionals. Social media platforms like Instagram, Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter, and YouTube allow fitness professionals to share information with countless numbers of potential clients—but only if promoted the right way. The short video formats are perfect for fitness professionals who want to provide a brief demonstration of a specific exercise, an entire workout, or a more detailed explanation about how to perform a challenging movement.

Oleksiy Mark/Shutterstock.com

Social media is changing the way many fitness professionals do business by being able to advertise online coaching services to a much wider audience than could ever be reached by simply working in a health club. For example, social media platforms allow fitness professionals to post exercise or workout videos that can then be used to market online personal training services. Theoretically, this means that a fitness professional could potentially develop and work with an entire client list without ever stepping foot in a gym.

An important recommendation for fitness professionals who want to use social media to promote their business is to maintain separate accounts: one to share public information for potential clients and coworkers and a different account to share personal information with friends and family members. When sharing personal activities outside of work, a Certified Personal Trainer should be consistent with a fit and healthy lifestyle, but it is still a good idea to keep business and personal lives separate.

### INDUSTRY EVENTS AND NETWORKING

Another way to market a fitness business is by attending fitness-industry events like conferences, trade shows, or workshops and networking with other like-minded fitness professionals. Remember that some fitness professionals may prefer to work with a specific population of clients, so getting to know those specialized individuals can open doors for professional collaboration. Each can refer clients to others based on their respective, unique skill sets. In this scenario, instead of competing, each fitness professional’s business becomes elevated, and all succeed.

Another benefit of attending industry events is that many are also marketed to fitness consumers and other members of the general public, creating opportunities to market services to a wide audience. Health fairs and fitness expos provide good opportunities for Certified Personal Trainers to attend events where a number of consumers are interested in learning more about exercise.

## Images

**Table 2-4: outlines what a Four P's marketing plan could look like for an independent personal trainer.TABLE 2-4 Sample Marketing PlanMarketing Plan: Jane Doe’s Epic Personal Training**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH02_UNNUN13.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533