---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: A Day in the Life
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
Fitness professionals also need to realize that whether they are working with clients in a health club, leading a group through an outdoor workout, or posting a video on social media, they are always being watched by others. For example, a member on a piece of cardio equipment watching a fitness professional work with another client will always make a variety of judgments based on personal observations. If the member observes that the fitness professional is distracted or acting unprofessionally, then that individual will most likely avoid opting for personal training services. However, fitness professionals who are attentive, communicate clearly, and provide encouragement and motivation will be noticed favorably by other members in the facility. Being professional and caring is one of the best forms of advertising for future clients.

#### TRAINING TIP

Fitness professionals should always be seeking to improve their customer service skills. Providing remarkable customer service increases the likelihood that clients will adhere to their exercise program. In his book, *How to Win Friends and Influence People*, sales and management expert Dale Carnegie (1936) identified important tips for how to deliver an exceptional service to all clients in any industry:

	- **Smile.** People feel appreciated and tend to smile back when a professional smiles first.

	- **Say hello and look people in the eye**. Unless the culture views eye contact as threatening, this is a great way to create an instant connection with people.

	- **Listen**. Actively listen and encourage others to talk about themselves.

	- **Act as if you are the owner of your own business**. Even if you work for someone else, your daily actions should reflect the values of the business.

	- **Introduce yourself and ask for the individual’s name**. Make sure to use their name in conversation.

	- **Talk in terms of the other person’s interests**. This can help build understanding and find areas of common interests.

### SAFETY PROCEDURES

From a minor injury like spraining an ankle to a severe medical emergency like cardiac arrest, it is important that all fitness professionals who work in a facility are prepared to handle a variety of emergencies and unexpected situations. Therefore, it is important for fitness professionals to be familiar with all facility safety procedures, such as where emergency equipment is located, how to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and how to use an automated external defibrillator (AED) device. Each fitness business will have its own unique safety procedures, which should be clearly explained during employee onboarding.

If a Certified Personal Trainer is contracting space from various facilities, it is important to ask about each facility’s safety policies and procedures in case of an emergency. Fitness professionals who travel to work in clients’ homes or lead outdoor conditioning programs need to establish their own robust safety guidelines and should always have the necessary first aid equipment to be able to handle any unexpected injuries that could occur during the course of a workout session, including investing in an AED device. It is highly recommended that independent fitness professionals seek additional first aid certification on top of the CPR and AED certification required of all Certified Personal Trainers. Additionally, before working with clients independently, personal liability insurance must be purchased and maintained, and it is also suggested that fitness professionals work with a legal professional to develop a client consent form as an additional level of protection.