---
section_number: 1
section_title: Professional Development and Responsibility
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Personal Training Profession
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Career Development
weight: 10%
objectives:
  - Adhering to professional standards and business development practices.
---

## Content
## Job Search and Interviewing

Mangostar/Shutterstock.com

The purpose of the resume is to market a candidate’s skills to obtain an in-person interview with the hiring manager. The interview then becomes the step where an applicant presents their skills to a potential employer as a solution that can help improve business. Working as a fitness professional in most commercial health clubs is both a sales-based and customer service-oriented business, and the interview is the first opportunity a prospective fitness professional has to demonstrate their sales and customer-service skills with the hiring manager. But before securing an interview, it is important for aspiring fitness professionals to know where to look for potential employment.

### WHERE TO LOOK FOR A JOB

When it comes time for the job search, most online employment websites include job postings of companies looking to hire Certified Personal Trainers. In addition to using employment websites, aspiring job candidates should go directly to the websites of any potential employers to learn about their hiring process. Furthermore, another search tactic can be to drive around the town where employment is desired and identify potential facilities. In addition to a resume, most employers will require a candidate to complete an employment application on the company website to initiate the hiring process. But it is always a good idea for the candidate to also visit in person whenever possible to personalize the process for a greater chance of success.

Once the application is complete, there may be an initial screening process, such as a pre-interview questionnaire or a telephone interview to see if applicants meet the basic qualifications the employer has identified as being essential for success before offering an in-person interview.

### ATTIRE

Even though the standard uniform for a fitness professional is exercise clothing, when visiting a potential employer to inquire about job opportunities, it is necessary to dress in professional business attire. Wearing traditional business clothing shows a potential employer that a job candidate takes the opportunity seriously and understands the importance of professionalism.

When interviewing for the position, it will be equally necessary to wear professional business attire to demonstrate respect for the professional nature of the job. Even though fitness professionals work in an informal environment where they may have to demonstrate a variety of different exercises, they are still delivering a professional service and should dress like a professional when interviewing for a position. Once hired, most fitness businesses will provide specific uniform guidelines to ensure consistent, high-quality customer service.

#### TRAINING TIP

When working as a fitness professional, avoid wearing muscle shirts or clothes that are too tight or overly revealing. Instead, wear tasteful workout attire. Implement proper, professional grooming standards, such as combing hair or pulling it back and wearing minimal cologne, perfume, or jewelry. Consider it from the client’s perspective: a client may not be interested in working with a fitness professional who is disheveled or poorly groomed or one who is wearing clothes that are inappropriate for a professional setting.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH02_UNNUN07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533