---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Social Influences on Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
**Empathy**, an important component of emotional support, happens when someone identifies with the way another person feels. A simple way to describe being empathetic is the ability to put yourself in someone else’s shoes. Empathy helps people relate and connect and ultimately helps them feel that they are understood. Exercise can be a very rewarding experience that people thoroughly enjoy, but it can also be frustrating when results are not evident, or when exercise is uncomfortable; emotional support can be the one thing that keeps someone going.

Routinely communicating with clients, asking how they are doing and how they feel their program is going, is a way to foster relationships. Fitness professionals should also demonstrate empathy by indicating their understanding of how a client feels. Emotional support may be important to some clients daily while others only need it occasionally. Taking the time to get to know clients and learning about their preferences will ensure that individual needs are met.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Empathy and sympathy are two different concepts. Sympathy typically involves pity and feeling sorry for someone else. Conversely, empathy is a deep understanding and recognition of how someone feels. Empathy does not involve judgment.

### INFORMATIONAL SUPPORT

**Informational support** is when someone receives accurate information about a behavior or topic. This is the most common type of support provided by a fitness professional. Finding information about exercise and fitness has become easier with countless online platforms, but the accuracy of information is sometimes questionable based on the source. A client might first receive informational support regarding exercise from a healthcare provider, family member, friend, coworker, or social media influencer. However, seeking out additional and more specific informational support may be one of the top reasons for a person to hire a Certified Personal Trainer.

Clients rely heavily on fitness professionals to have the most accurate and up-to-date information as well as the ability to answer questions. Informational support includes providing general fitness advice and programming, providing specific feedback on progress with program adjustments, providing new and interesting information about the benefits of exercise versus the drawbacks of inactivity, and being able to dispel and correct myths and inaccurate information. Therefore, it is imperative for fitness professionals to have a strong foundation regarding general exercise science, as well as the habit of continually seeking out correct information to pass along to clients.

### COMPANIONSHIP SUPPORT

**Companionship support** describes the way that someone engages in a behavior with another individual. This type of support is often observed in an exercise setting where people exercise with a friend or partner. Companionship support can have several positive influences on exercise behavior. As a form of accountability, it can encourage consistency, create a friendly competition, foster social relationships, and serve as a distraction to the discomforts caused by exercise.

Exercising with a partner also requires people to plan because schedules must be coordinated and time needs to be blocked off. This can help eliminate excuses that could have encouraged a person to skip a workout. Companionship support is a key component of face-to-face personal training, with the fitness professional present for the entire exercise session.

## Key Terms

**Empathy**
The ability to identify with another person’s feelings, attitudes, or thoughts.

**Informational support**
Providing accurate, current, and informative information.

**Companionship support**
When someone engages in a behavior with an individual. This type of support is often observed in an exercise setting where people exercise with a friend or partner.