---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Role of Psychology in Fitness and Wellness
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# The Role of Psychology in Fitness  and Wellness

The role of **psychology **in fitness and wellness is extremely important. It can deal with several topics, including the way exercise participation affects someone’s mood in both the short and the long term, the effect of weight loss on self-esteem, the motivations to become physically active, and how social influences affect overall exercise behavior. One of the most important things about psychology and its relationship with fitness and wellness is the role it plays in the behavioral change process. Since an alarming number of people don’t participate in regular physical activity, there is an ongoing need for interventions that address behavioral change, specifically in helping people transition from a sedentary lifestyle to an active one.

Generally speaking, psychology influences the decision to either be physically active or not active on any given day. People must value and prioritize exercise in the midst of busy lifestyles, including demands from family, work, and other competing interests, such as leisure time. Exercise participation is influenced by several factors, including motivation, goals, barriers, self-confidence, and a variety of social influences. When working with someone who is new to exercise or returning to exercise, behavioral change can be guided by the fitness professional finding out why these clients want to participate now and what has stopped them in the past. Uncovering this information will help ensure an exercise program can be tailored to the specific needs of each client, with an additional understanding of the challenges faced by clients regarding exercise **adherence**.

## Key Terms

**Psychology**
An area of science that focuses on people, and in particular, how the mind and feelings may influence behaviors.

**Adherence**
The level of commitment to a behavior or plan of action.