---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
In addition to assisting clients, a fitness professional’s understanding of the significant impact of regular physical activity on psychological variables provides an additional platform to promote the benefits of adopting an active lifestyle. Exercise is associated with improved mood, better sleep quality, increased self-esteem, improved body image, and decreased symptoms of depression and anxiety. Fitness professionals should strive to provide excellent customer service, which reaches beyond the ability to create unique and progressive programs; it also includes a personable aspect that fosters relationships.

### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 3 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 3 Audio Review

**00:0009:39**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Psychology is an important component to behavioral change and plays a key role in adopting a regular habit to exercise.

	- Psychologists and psychiatrists are trained and licensed professionals who treat people with mental illnesses.

	- Sport and exercise psychology is a subtopic of psychology that focuses on understanding why people participate in sports and exercise, including motives and barriers to participation.

	- Extrinsic motivation happens when someone does something for rewards or recognition.

	- Intrinsic motivation describes the motivation to do something that comes from within an individual; it is strongly related to long-term adherence.

	- Motivation to exercise differs among individuals and will change over time; therefore, motives should be reevaluated over time.

	- Common barriers to exercise include lack of time, unrealistic goals, lack of social support, social physique anxiety, lack of convenience, and ambivalence, but all barriers can be either eliminated or minimized with some basic strategies that provide realistic solutions or alternatives.

	- Lack of time can be minimized by improving time management and reevaluating daily priorities.

	- Setting unrealistic goals can become a barrier to exercise; therefore, the fitness professional should assist clients with setting appropriate outcome and process goals.

	- Social physique anxiety refers to people feeling anxious about how others perceive their bodies and can be a barrier to exercise participation. Helping clients find activities that reduce this type of anxiety will help create a comfortable exercise environment.

	- The perception barrier of exercise as inconvenient can be overcome by making the exercise experience as appealing as possible, both by providing excellent customer service in clean facilities and by helping clients find ways to exercise outside of a fitness facility.

	- Ambivalence to exercise occurs when someone has mixed feelings about exercise and likely sees pros and cons to participation.

	- Social influences on exercise can come from other people, the internet, or the environment; these influences can lead people both toward and away from exercise.

	- Social support consists of a source (who or what provides it) and a type (instrumental, emotional, informational, and companionship), and clients will have different needs and expectations of social support.

	- Instrumental support includes the tangible things that assist people with the ability to exercise, such as providing transportation to a fitness facility, assisting with childcare, or packing someone’s gym bag.

	- Emotional support comes from being caring, empathetic, and concerned about someone’s experience with exercise.

	- Showing empathy includes the ability to relate to the way another person feels or views a situation.