---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Psychology of Exercise
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Psychological Benefits of Exercise
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
### HELPFUL HINT

Body image and self-esteem are related. In many cases, they have a mutual relationship, meaning that as body image improves, self-esteem will also likely improve. This is also true in the other direction; for example, if self-esteem decreases, body image will likely become more negative and vice versa.

## Improves Sleep

Sleep is an important part of everyone’s day in terms of how a person will function. As our most restorative tool, it is necessary for nearly every physical, physiological, and psychological function. Sleep, or lack thereof, plays a significant role in physical and mental health, overall quality of life, and even one’s safety (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2019). Sleep has many restorative functions and is vital for proper growth, development, healing, and learning. Sleep-deficient individuals are at a greater risk of heart disease, stroke, high blood pressure, and obesity (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2019). When someone is sleep-deprived, they are also at risk for making poor decisions and not thinking properly, which can cause problems with work or relationships.

Exercise has been shown to improve sleep. Moderate amounts of exercise, in terms of frequency, duration, and intensity, are associated with significantly lower disturbances in sleep compared to sedentary behavior. This suggests that exercise needs to reach a certain threshold to be beneficial, but excessive physical activity may not improve sleep quality (Litleskare et al., 2018). People diagnosed with chronic sleep disturbances may benefit from all types of regular exercise. In fact, increasing physical activity to at least 150 minutes per week at a moderate intensity can decrease symptoms of insomnia (Hartescu et al., 2015).

Resistance training has also been shown to improve sleep for people with chronic insomnia (D’Aurea et al., 2019). Exercise is also believed to be beneficial for people with more serious sleep disturbances. In patients being treated with exercise for **sleep apnea**, symptoms were shown to improve with increased physical activity (Aiello et al., 2016). Overall, the relationship between regular exercise and improving sleep is positive.

## Reduces Depression and Anxiety

According to the World Health Organization, depression is a common mental health issue that afflicts approximately 300 million people worldwide (World Health Organization, 2018). Anxiety can be experienced with depression but can also occur by itself. Research on the effects of exercise on depression and anxiety has been conducted for decades and continues to be an area of interest among health professionals, including physicians, psychologists, and exercise scientists.

Much of the interest in this area surrounds exercise as a treatment option for depression. One of the challenges is that people with depression tend to participate in low levels of physical activity, and they are less likely than their nondepressed counterparts to meet current physical activity guidelines (Schuch et al., 2018). The evidence also shows that exercise may be effective in offering a preventive effect against the development of depression across all ages regardless of geographic area (Schuch et al., 2018).

The intensity of exercise may be important when addressing depression. One study showed that both moderate-intensity exercise and high-intensity exercise decreased depression; however, the high-intensity exercise also increased perceived stress, suggesting that moderate-intensity exercise may be best (Paolucci et al., 2018). For some individuals, even a simple approach to physical activity can lead to psychological improvements. For example, a monitored walking program performed three times per week resulted in reduced anxiety in a group of previously inactive overweight and obese individuals (Vancini et al., 2017). While depression and anxiety are common, a person’s mental health should always be taken seriously. The inclusion of exercise as a way to reduce or prevent symptoms has promise, but a treatment plan must always originate from a qualified healthcare provider.

## Key Terms

**Sleep apnea**
A sleep disorder in which a person’s breathing repeatedly stops and starts, which disrupts the body’s natural sleep cycle.