---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: The Initial Session
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# The Initial Session

Wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com

Success in the fitness industry depends on building lasting relationships with clients. This requires spending time with clients and getting to understand why their goals are important. During the initial consultation, clients will often decide if they want to continue their relationship with the fitness professional. Therefore, it is crucial that clients feel that their needs will be met if they are to return after the initial session. This involves assessing their readiness for exercise, understanding their goals, listening, showing support, and collaborating with them to create an individual exercise program.

In addition to assessing a readiness for change, ask clients about their past experiences with exercise. What have they liked the most and what has worked best for them in the past? If clients have worked with Certified Personal Trainers before, ask them what they liked and did not like about working with them. 

Before the end of the initial consultation, the Certified Personal Trainer should have discussed any health concerns the client may have, clarified fitness goals, covered previous exercise experiences, and finalized a plan for the client. Once the program has been designed, the Certified Personal Trainer must communicate what the process is going to look like and assess the client’s readiness to begin.

BCTs, by nature, are generic and need translation into practical application (Kok, 2014), and part of practical application is deciding on the appropriate channel of delivery (in person, text message, email, or social media posts). Therefore, the Certified Personal Trainer must know what the client wants to change before understanding how to change it. The initial client consultation is vital, because it will give the Certified Personal Trainer direction toward which BCTs may need to be implemented depending on a client’s readiness to change.

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH04_UNNUN13.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533