---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Motivational Interviewing
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
For this reason, questions properly framed within motivational interviewing methodology will help clients realize that their ideal self is better than their current state, boosting their motivation to make changes for the better.

### CHANGE TALK AND SUSTAIN TALK

Another technique for using motivational interviewing with clients is to understand the difference between sustain talk and change talk in a client’s dialogue. **Sustain talk** encompasses statements made by clients that support current behaviors, such as physical inactivity (Clifford & Curtis, 2016). Sustain talk can be identified when a client voices advantages of the current status quo, disadvantages of changing, intention not to change, and pessimism about change. For example, a client who says something like, “My busy lifestyle makes it too hard to schedule time to work out,” is using sustain talk.

The opposite of sustain talk is change talk. **Change talk** signifies movement toward change and can be identified when a client voices dissatisfaction with the status quo, advantages of change, intention to change, and optimism for change (Miller & Rollnick, 2013). For example, a client who admits, “I’m afraid I may not be able to play with my kids if I don’t get into better shape,” is using change talk, whether they realize it or not.

### AVOIDING ARGUMENTS

Fitness professionals are far less likely to induce change if they are arguing with their clients. This will push their clients to become defensive and justify current behavior. If clients are using sustain talk in their conversations about fitness, they are expressing a resistance to change, but that resistance does not necessarily mean they are unable or unwilling to change. The clients may simply be experiencing ambivalence that makes them hesitant to commit to certain changes.

To help combat resistance while avoiding arguments, fitness professionals should present a variety of exercise options and solutions for driving change that the client can choose from until ones that are manageable and appealing are identified. Carefully wording questions is important to avoid arguments against change. Statements or questions that provoke resistance may force the client to argue for the current status quo and move away from change talk. **Table 4-2** outlines some examples of questions that may provoke resistance and provides some more appropriate alternatives.

**TABLE 4-2 Questions That Promote Change**

| Questions That Provoke Resistance | Questions That Promote Change |
|---|---|
| Why don’t you want to change?
	What makes you think that you’re not at risk?
	Why don’t you just do this?
	Why can’t you make this change to your schedule? | What might you want to change?
	What do you think might happen if you didn’t make any changes?
	Do you think this could work for you?
	If you decided to make this change, what would be different in your life? |

## Key Terms

**Sustain talk**
Talk that represents and predicts movement away from change.

**Change talk**
Talk that reflects movement of the person toward behavior change.