---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

The primary goal of the fitness professional is to help individuals adopt a regular exercise program and stay active for the long term. Certified Personal Trainers need to understand how ready clients are to change and take appropriate action to increase their motivation and commitment. The Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change provides fitness professionals with the ability to assess the stage of change that a client is in. Certified Personal Trainers should understand what the determinants of exercise are and assess what needs to change within clients to prompt them to exercise consistently. They need to understand why change is important to the client, learn to communicate effectively with the client, and apply the appropriate BCTs to drive the successful attainment of the client’s goals. Additionally, Certified Personal Trainers should be familiar with their clients’ barriers to exercise adoption and adherence to be able to lend support and guidance in motivating clients to regular exercise.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

Despite the benefits of regularly engaging in exercise and physical activity, most people do not meet the recommended guidelines. People may have a variety of issues with exercise, including failure to begin exercise and failure to maintain an exercise program. This means that people may not get started and people may get derailed. To help instill confidence and support, Certified Personal Trainers should be careful to act and dress professionally and to ensure that the training environment is conducive to long-term adherence.

Engaging in exercise has several determinants, including self-efficacy, behavioral intentions, outcome expectations, planning, self-monitoring, and goal setting. If clients struggle with motivation, confidence, knowledge, goal setting, or working around barriers, Certified Personal Trainers should be able to assess those areas and provide strategies. Fitness professionals should be able to assess what clients need and how ready they are for change and provide them with the appropriate techniques to drive change for the better.

Initial consultations should cover health concerns and help clients clarify their goals. Certified Personal Trainers should gain a sound understanding of their clients’ previous exercise experience and discover what they did and did not like. Training programs should be based on the client’s preferences and capabilities to enhance motivation and adherence. Certified Personal Trainers should master effective communication skills and take away insights from coaching styles, such as motivational interviewing.

Fitness professionals build rapport with clients by engaging in active listening to understand their goals, helping clients identify discrepancies between where they currently are and where they want to be, and navigating sustain talk by fostering change talk. Once rapport and an understanding of client’s goals have been established, Certified Personal Trainers can help clients set SMART goals, improve their confidence through experience, help them navigate through challenges by identifying barriers and planning ways to work around them, and encourage self-monitoring of behavior.

Motivation to perform well during a session can be enhanced by using positive self-talk, imagery, and psyching-up strategies. When correctly implemented, they will promote the adoption and adherence to exercise.