---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Importance of Effective Communication Skills
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
Closed-ended questions let the fitness professional drive the conversation to get specific answers to specific questions, whereas open-ended questions let the client feel engaged in the conversation rather than being interrogated. That feeling of inclusion is one of the first steps toward building rapport, comfort, and trust.

#### TRY THIS

**Accentuate the Positive**

When first working to uncover a client’s needs, ask how important making change is on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 = lowest, 10 = highest). If the client believes change is very important (a 9 or 10), that’s great! This type of response is indicative of someone who will probably be fully committed to the fitness plan and be a relatively easy client to work with for the long term. If the client lists a low number (a 6 or below), they may need some coaching and enhanced motivation to really buy in.

To keep things moving in a positive direction, instead of asking why clients don’t feel more committed to change, try asking them why they didn’t rate their commitment even lower (a 3 or 4). This will prime them to defend and argue for their own change based on things they already see as positive in their lives.

Asking clients, Why didn’t you rate it higher? drives them to think about the things they are not doing, which can be internalized as negative and lead to feelings of self-doubt. However, asking, Why didn’t you rate it lower? makes them think about all the positive things that support their current commitment rating.

### REFLECTING

Reflections are conversational techniques that express the supposed meaning of what was just heard and form the basis of the previously discussed reflective listening technique. Reflections are both subtle and powerful and represent an opportunity to make sure what each person says is accurately understood; it gives clients an opportunity to ensure they said what they thought or felt. Reflections are powerful because they help clearly demonstrate that active listening is occurring.

Clients feel heard and understood when the Certified Personal Trainer takes the time to reflect and reword or paraphrase what was just said. Reflective listening is advantageous because it can emphasize why a client feels ambivalent about change, what their strengths are, and why change is important to the client (Clifford & Curtis, 2016). Creating an accurate reflection statement involves intently listening to what the client is saying and attempting to understand what they mean.

Reflections do not necessarily have to be clarifying questions either. Simple statements can go a long way to show that someone is actively listening. A properly placed “uh huh” with a head nod displays agreement, while saying “oh no” with sympathetic eyes can express concern and caring. In fact, reflection statements are one of the best ways to demonstrate empathy with a client.

### SUMMARIZING

Summaries are a series of reflections. If fitness professionals have successfully reflected with their clients, then summaries should be simple. Summaries draw all the important points of the conversation together and allow clients to clarify either what they have said or how the fitness professional has interpreted what they have said. Summaries demonstrate greater depth of listening throughout an entire conversation. There are three types of summaries: **collecting summaries**, **linking summaries**, and **transitional summaries** (Miller & Rollnick, 2013).

Collecting summaries are short sentences that continue a client’s thoughts to keep a conversation moving along. They are used in the same way as more simple reflections during a conversation to make sure the listener is staying on track.

## Key Terms

**Collecting summaries**
Short sentences that continue the client’s thoughts and add momentum to the conversation.

**Linking summaries**
Summaries that tie together information the client has presented, perhaps even from previous sessions.

**Transitional summaries**
Summaries used to wrap up a session or announce a shift in focus.