---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Stages of Change Model
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
### TRAINING TIP

If a client happens to cancel a session, the fitness professional should do at least one of the following two things:

	- Ask the client when they would like to reschedule the session.

	- Prompt the client to make a plan for continuing to exercise in the interim, if the rescheduled session is not soon (within 24–48 hours).

## Maintenance

Maintenance is the stage in which clients are consistently working to maintain their active lifestyle, sticking to their exercise plans for 6 months or more. These individuals do not use cognitive change processes as frequently as they would have in the action phase, and they are less tempted to relapse. At this stage, their self-efficacy levels are generally high. Individuals in the maintenance stage may use certain behavioral strategies, such as inviting other people to exercise with them or making plans to make up missed sessions, to avoid relapsing back to earlier stages.

### TRY THIS

Use this worksheet to identify your client’s stage of change. Each time the client answers no, move to the next question. If they answer yes, stop there; the question you stopped at identifies the stage of change the client is currently in.

			**Questions**
			**Client Answers No**
			**Client Answers Yes**

			**1**
			Have you been routinely exercising for more than 6 months?
			↓ Go to next question
			**Maintenance stage**

			**2**
			Have you been routinely exercising for less than 6 months?
			↓ Go to next question
			**Action stage**

			**3**
			Are you making set plans to begin an exercise program within the next 6 months?
			↓ Go to next question
			**Preparation stage**

			**4**
			Do you think you need to increase the amount you exercise?
			↓↓↓↓↓↓
			**Contemplation stage**

			**Precontemplation stage***

~***Note**: If someone answers no to all questions, they would be in the precontemplation stage; however, remember that situation is extremely rare. If a person is having a conversation about fitness with a fitness professional, they are already at least in the contemplation stage.~