---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
A well-defined goal aims and directs action to an end state and/or standard of proficiency within a specified time limit. Goals work through four functions that include the following:

	- Directing attention and effort toward relevant activities and away from counterproductive activities

	- Energizing action and effort

	- Influencing persistence of effort

	- Leading people to seek out goal-relevant information (Locke & Latham, 2002)

As it relates to exercise, goal setting is a process that involves assessing one’s current level of fitness, creating a broad goal toward a future level of fitness, and then detailing the actions that need to be taken to achieve that goal. Initial goal-setting sessions with new clients should be focused on developing long-term goals first based on their personal values. To set overarching long-term goals, fitness professionals may ask clients some of the following questions:

	- What do you want to accomplish in the next 6 months?

	- What do you want to accomplish in the next year?

	- What does success in fitness look like to you?

From the long-term goals that clients have expressed, the fitness professional should help the client create achievable short-term goals that provide a focused path, motivation, and confidence when each short-term goal is accomplished. Short-term goals help focus clients’ attention on the now and help them narrow down goals to the ones that are the most important and doable. This is where the concept of making a goal SMART plays a key role. The SMART goal should adhere to the following criteria:

	- **Specific**

		- The intended goal outcome must be clearly defined. For example, “I want to lose weight” is a vague goal with no objective way to know when it will be accomplished. A specific goal says, “I want to lose 5 pounds (2.2 kg),” which precisely details that the goal will be achieved when 5 pounds are lost.

	- **Measurable**

		- Goal progress must be objectively measured and tracked over time with hard data, not based on subjective reports. For example, regularly scheduled weigh-ins can track a weight loss goal by recording the date and the client’s scale weight each time. This data is then used to objectively track progress toward the specific outcome that is desired.

	- **Attainable**

		- A goal must be challenging yet achievable by the client. If a goal is too easy, the client may not put in sufficient effort. Similarly, if the goal is too challenging, the client may become discouraged and stop following the fitness plan.