---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
In the beginning stages of exercise adoption, outcome goals may seem challenging and out of reach. Process goals help clients focus on the now, rather than dwelling on a specific outcome that may take months or years to achieve. For example, a new, formerly sedentary client may have an outcome goal of completing a half marathon; however, focusing on that when they currently have trouble running 2 miles will quickly become discouraging. Concentrating on the process not only helps narrow the field of view to something much more comfortable (i.e., realistic and attainable) but also builds in the ability to achieve *small wins* much more frequently. Each small win will help a client objectively witness their progress, boosting the client’s motivation to stick to the program. Process goals increase ability, competence, and confidence and can help clients progress to a point where they can better implement their newfound abilities to reach an outcome.

For example, to help make the outcome of completing a half marathon in 6 months seem far less daunting, an initial process goal of consistently running for 20 minutes, 3 days per week, for 2 weeks could be put in place. Now, the simple act of completing six 20-minute runs gives the client a win, and the goal can be progressed to something a bit more challenging, such as running for 30 minutes, 3 days per week. At that rate, by simply adding 10 minutes of additional running to the process every 2 weeks, the client should be able to run for 2 full hours (the average half marathon completion time) after around 18 weeks of training.

#### HELPFUL HINT

Outcome goals focus on an end result and vary depending on the individual’s skillset and motivation. Some examples of outcome goals can be winning a state championship in softball, losing 20 pounds (9 kg) in 4 months, or earning a spot on a competitive sports team.

Process goals include daily or weekly strategies that help individuals reach their outcome goals. For example, if a client has an outcome goal of earning a spot on a competitive basketball team, an appropriate process goal could be to schedule 1 hour of practice each day after school to work on ball handling and shooting skills.

#### TRAINING TIP

Although following goal-setting principles is important for fitness professionals, individual differences always need to be considered because clients are different based on their unique personalities and motivations.

To help individualize goals for clients, ask open-ended questions to more clearly understand their intrinsic motivation and barriers to new lifestyle habits. Some examples include the following:

	- What are your biggest concerns about your health and exercise habits?

	- What work are you prepared to do to reach your goal?

	- How motivated are you to reach your goal?

	- What have you tried in the past to reach your goal?

	- Did it succeed? Why or why not?

	- What has prevented you from reaching your goal in the past?

	- Have you already started making changes to your exercise or dietary habits?

### ENHANCING SELF-EFFICACY

Several techniques have been shown to enhance self-efficacy for physical activity, including action planning, reinforcing effort or progress toward exercise, providing instructions, self-monitoring, and social support (Olander et al., 2013; Williams & French, 2011).