---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Importance of Effective Communication Skills
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# Importance of Effective Communication Skills

Before considering specific techniques to improve adherence, the Certified Personal Trainer should understand that the BCTs that help improve exercise adherence are equally as important as the style of delivery used and the relationship the fitness professional has built with each client. In other words, it’s not only *what *fitness professionals say, but *how *they say it.

Effective communication skills are crucial to further understand client needs and build a trusting relationship. Good communicators should strive to do the following:

	- Create a safe environment where challenging and emotional issues can be discussed.

	- Clear away distractions such as cell phones and focus on the client.

	- Ask questions to understand the meaning of what the person is saying.

	- Observe nonverbal cues such as body language.

	- Provide **empathy** and validation (Zenger & Folkman, 2016).

Certified Personal Trainers should strive to achieve each of these communication strategies, because their use can minimize disagreements that may make the relationship with a client uncomfortable. By maximizing support and minimizing disagreements, fitness professionals will build **rapport** with the client, which can help contribute to adherence to an exercise program.

## Nonverbal and Verbal Communication

Nonverbal communication is the exchange of information through bodily cues other than words and can have a profound impact on social interactions. It represents the many ways in which humans communicate information without directly speaking. Nonverbal communication often occurs at the same time as verbal communication and can include posture, hand gestures, proximity to others, and facial expressions (Crane & Crane, 2010).

Facial expressions and posture are key nonverbal communicators in all interactions with others. Fitness professionals should be sure to smile and avoid frowning, as well as always stand up straight and avoid crossing arms. A slouched posture demonstrates a lack of confidence and professionalism, while crossed arms send a closed-off signal. Gaze direction also demonstrates the level of interest that someone has in what the other is saying. Certified Personal Trainers should make it a point to make eye contact when their clients are speaking and nod their heads to show that they are listening and understand what their clients are saying.

Additionally, when listening to clients, fitness professionals may want to lean in a bit closer. This demonstrates that they are intently paying attention to everything the client is saying and can bring about greater feelings of being cared for. However, proximity to a client needs to be judged on a case-by-case basis, because everyone has a different level of comfort regarding how close they like to be to others. This means that fitness professionals not only need to maintain their own positive nonverbal communication but also need to be able to read their client’s nonverbal cues and adjust accordingly.

Verbal communication is information that is conveyed by speaking. In a professional setting, it is extremely important for verbal messages to be clear so that they are received and interpreted correctly. The listener needs to clarify what they have heard from the speaker and, in turn, the speaker needs to confirm that the listener heard correctly. Sometimes people use their wording imperfectly to express what they are trying to communicate (**Figure 4-2**). Therefore, the Certified Personal Trainer should be sure they understand what a client means before shifting to a new topic.

## Key Terms

**Empathy**
The ability to identify with another person’s feelings, attitudes, or thoughts.

**Rapport**
A relationship in which two people understand each other’s ideas, have respect for one another, and communicate well.

## Images

**Figure 4-2: Reflective listening**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH04_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533