---
section_number: 2
section_title: Client Relations and Behavioral Coaching
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Behavioral Coaching
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Applying exercise psychology and behavioral coaching.
---

## Content
# Strategies to Enhance Exercise Adherence

The health benefits of exercise depend on long-term commitment (Kompf & LaVaute, 2017). Purchasing a gym membership—and particularly personal training sessions—represents a strong intention to exercise. Therefore, it is safe to say that anyone who has taken the step to hire a Certified Personal Trainer has an intention to exercise (i.e., the individual is at least in the contemplation stage of change). However, good intentions do not necessarily mean that the client will stick to an exercise plan.

In fact, a substantial number of individuals who intend to exercise do not follow through (Godin & Conner, 2008). The anticipated number of visits to a gym are predictive of actual visits to the gym; however, people tend to overestimate how often they believe they will exercise. For example, one study found that gym members who predicted they would exercise more than 3 times per week ended up only exercising 1.39 times per week (Garon et al., 2015). Additionally, people with self-control–related barriers were much more likely to overestimate how often they would exercise (Garon et al., 2015). Therefore, any BCT that can help clients act on their intentions to exercise could be beneficial.

NDAB Creativity/Shutterstock.com

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH04_UNNUN09.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533