---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The most often cited reason for supplement use is in harmony with the most common supplement used: multivitamins. Use of multivitamin supplements is associated with reduced risk of some diseases, such as cardiovascular disease and cancer (Blumberg et al., 2018). However, it is not clear whether the apparent improvement in health and wellness is a result of supplement use directly. Supplement users also tend to exercise, diet, sleep, visit their doctor, maintain a healthy weight, and resist smoking more actively than nonusers.

As some dietary supplements provide **essential nutrients** for human nutrition, there are use cases that are more substantial than others. For example, there is rarely a true need to use a preworkout supplement to improve health, but someone on a restricted diet may have a physiological need to add a vitamin or mineral supplement due to inadequate intakes. However, this is not to state that a preworkout supplement does not confer benefits on training capacity and desired outcomes in all cases. Some dietary supplements may also lead to **toxicity** if overconsumed. For these reasons, it is vital to consider the client’s overall health status when discussing dietary supplements and to refer them to their physician when it concerns significant health outcomes.

Every client will have some sort of fitness-related goal. They may want to lose weight, build muscle, enhance cardiorespiratory endurance, or improve their lifestyle habits for healthier living. Whatever their goal may be, there is likely a supplement they may consider using to help achieve that goal. The fitness professional can guide clients toward responsible and effective supplement decisions and/or refer them to their licensed health care provider (physician, registered dietitian) when necessary.

## Key Terms

**Essential nutrient**
Must be obtained in the diet, as the body is incapable of producing the nutrient on its own.

**Toxicity**
When too much of a vitamin or mineral accumulates within the body, resulting in illness or other symptoms.