---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Ergogenic Aids
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
During ischemic brain injury, some brain damage occurs as a result of insufficient energy, as ATP is required to keep the cells alive. Early studies in this area show that increasing creatine in brain cells reduces brain damage caused by ischemia (inadequate blood supply) (Adcock et al., 2002). However, the application of creatine in this area is beyond the scope of a fitness professional. Creatine is sometimes purported to contribute to muscle cramps and kidney damage. Creatinine is a by-product of ATP metabolism, and it is excreted by the kidneys. When blood or urine levels are high, it is assumed that the kidneys are not performing their duty of excretion. However, levels of creatinine are also correlated with muscle mass, animal protein consumption, activity, and creatine supplementation. These are idiopathic causes of increased creatinine levels that may trigger a false positive on a blood test and often cause the confusion that creatine causes kidney damage. No studies in healthy individuals have found increased kidney stress from creatine supplementation, and for those with kidney issues, doses of up to 3 g per day have been observed as safe for short-term supplementation (long-term studies are lacking) (Kreider et al., 2017). Creatine has also been reported to cause cramping, but the evidence supports either no effect or a reduced incidence of muscle cramps with creatine supplementation (Greenwood et al., 2003).

The fitness professional may use this information to educate their clients on appropriate creatine use. Clients wishing to supplement creatine should be advised that creatine monohydrate is the best creatine, they may load creatine (but it is not required), and they need not cycle creatine. Those wishing to experience some of the benefits of creatine while avoiding significant weight gain can be advised to consume half of the usual dose.

## Stimulants (Caffeine)

Caffeine is present in many products, such as coffee, tea, energy drinks, preworkout supplements, energy shots, and gum. Of all the dietary supplements discussed in this chapter, caffeine is the one most likely already being used by clients. Most will use it to combat tiredness and maintain their expected levels of daily functioning. For some, that may mean using caffeine as part of their exercise routine.

Caffeine is the world’s most popular supplement (Mitchell et al., 2014). There are a lot of stimulants available, but coffee and tea remain the most widely used delivery vehicles for caffeine. On average, a single person consumes 236 cups of tea and 132 cups of coffee per year (Infiniti Research Limited, 2018). Stimulants, including caffeine, increase physiological and metabolic activity. Caffeine is primarily used for energy and endurance and to increase metabolic rate.

Caffeine increases wakefulness, attention, and focus by chemically blocking receptors that create the sense of feeling tired. However, it also causes an **adrenaline** release, which increases metabolic rate and subsequently leads to more energy (ATP) being metabolized. The adrenaline release is also responsible for improving pain tolerance and mobilizing body fat stores.

It is hypothesized that the ergogenic effects of caffeine can be attributed to its improvement in pain tolerance rather than its mobilization of fatty acids (Astrup et al., 1990). Regardless of mechanism, caffeine is well supported for improving endurance performance, with some of the more favorable observations reporting improvements of 5–9% (Paton et al., 2010;  Schneiker et  al., 2006). Due to increasing metabolic rate, fatty acid mobilization, and satiety, caffeine is potentially beneficial for weight loss (Astrup et al., 1990; Tremblay et al., 1988). However, this may only be the case when caffeine is combined with other ingredients, such as green tea polyphenols or ephedra, as individuals become tolerant of caffeine (Astrup et al., 1992; Tabrizi et al., 2019; Westerterp-Plantenga et al., 2005). Caffeine is not well supported for improving strength performance (Goldstein et al., 2010).

Caffeine in dietary supplements is often found as **caffeine anhydrous**, which is nearly 100% caffeine. There may also be caffeine citrate, dicaffeine malate, or caffeine pterostilbene. These forms may offer a slower release of caffeine, reducing “crashing” after a few hours, but they contain less caffeine due to their chemical pairing and are often more expensive.

## Key Terms

**Adrenaline**
Hormone, also known as epinephrine, that excites bodily processes, increasing alertness and cell metabolism.

**Caffeine anhydrous**
A highly concentrated caffeine powder made from the seeds and leaves of coffee plants.