---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 10
chapter_title: Supplementation
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Health Supplements
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

One of vitamin C’s primary, yet lesser known, roles is in collagen formation. With collagen supplement popularity on the rise, it is interesting to note that vitamin C supplementation can also enhance rates of collagen synthesis (DePhillipo et al., 2018).

However, when the dose exceeds 1 g, absorption is reduced to less than 50%, and the remaining vitamin C is voided in the urine. Even at 200 times the recommended DV, it is estimated that body levels would only increase to approximately 4 times normal levels (Padayatty et al., 2004). Therefore, toxicity from vitamin C is unlikely, though gastrointestinal distress from high doses is possible.

True vitamin C deficiency is very rare, yet acute deficiency manifests as **scurvy**. The symptoms are typically mild, but if left untreated, they can be fatal. Initial symptoms of scurvy are fatigue and inflammation of the gums. This may progress to joint, bone, and capillary weakness and slow wound healing.

# HELPFUL HINT

To remember the most common deficiency symptom of vitamin C, think of this joke:

Where do sailors get scurvy? They get it at sea.

The B-complex vitamins are vitamin B1 (thiamine), B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin), B5 (pantothenic acid), B6 (pyridoxine), B7 (biotin; also known as vitamin H), B9 (folate), and B12 (cobalamin).

The B-vitamin complex is involved in a little bit of everything. Principally, these vitamins are involved in macronutrient metabolism. A few have important functions worth discussing. Biotin is often supplemented for hair, skin, and nail health; folate is involved in gene expression and is very important as a prenatal vitamin; and B12 is vital for red blood cell production.

Toxicity resulting from excessive B vitamin intake is rare, and it is not known to occur with most B vitamins; however, toxicity is possible for niacin, vitamin B6, and folate. The side effects of excess niacin are mild and include flushing and nausea. Vitamin B6 toxicity is difficult to achieve, but the effects can be serious, producing progressive sensory neuropathy (numbness or tingling of hands and feet), ataxia (impaired coordination due to damaged nerves), sensitivity to light, and skin lesions (abnormal skin growth or appearance) (Simpson et al., 2010). One concern surrounding excess folate is that it can cover up a B12 deficiency, which often occurs simultaneously with folate deficiency. Supplementing folate to correct folate deficiencies without B12 may allow the deficiency symptoms of B12 to continue. While folate is a very important prenatal vitamin, mothers who consume more than 1,000 mcg per day while pregnant have seen their children experience slower cognitive development. About 400–600 mcg or 600–800 mcg of DFE are found in multivitamins and prenatal vitamins, respectively. One DFE is equal to 1 mcg of folate or 0.6 mcg of folic acid, which makes folic acid—a common form of folate for supplementation—more potent than folate.

Except for pantothenic acid and biotin, one can be deficient in all B vitamins. Thiamine deficiency is most notable for producing **beriberi**, a condition that results in peripheral neuropathy and impaired motor function that is quickly reversed with thiamine treatment.

## Key Terms

**Scurvy**
A disease resulting from insufficient vitamin C and characterized by spontaneous bleeding (usually of the gums), anemia, swelling, weakened joints, and loss of teeth.

**Beriberi**
A thiamine deficiency that can result in inflammation or degeneration of the heart and nerves, peripheral neuropathy, and impaired motor function.