---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Muscular System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### HELPFUL HINT

**Tendons Versus Ligaments**

	- Tendons connect muscles to bones. Commonly discussed tendons include the Achilles tendon at the ankle and the patellar tendon of the knee. When a tendon is overstretched or torn, this is known as a *strain*.

	- Ligaments connect bones to bones. A commonly discussed ligament is the anterior cruciate ligament of the knee that connects the tibia to the femur. When a ligament is overstretched or torn, it is known as a *sprain*.

## Muscle Fibers and Their Contractile Elements

Within the endomysium of the fascicles, individual muscle fibers are themselves encased by a plasma membrane known as the sarcolemma (**Figure 5-38**). Each individual muscle fiber contains cellular components, such as sarcoplasm, which contains **glycogen**, fats, minerals, and oxygen-binding **myoglobin**, and mitochondria, which transform energy from food into energy for the cells. Each individual muscle fiber is then made up of structures called **myofibrils** (Frontera & Ochala, 2015). It is within the myofibrils that the physiological processes of muscle contraction occur.

Myofibrils are made up of overlapping **myofilaments** that are the actual contractile components of muscle tissue. These myofilaments are known as **actin** (thin, stringlike filaments) and **myosin** (thick filaments). The actin and myosin filaments form a number of repeating sections within the myofibrils. Each one of these particular repeating sections is known as a **sarcomere** (**Figure 5-39**) (Kenney et al., 2020).

A sarcomere is the functional unit of the muscular system, meaning it is the specific, physical site where muscle contraction occurs. The meeting point of each sarcomere is known as a **Z-line**, with each Z-line denoting another sarcomere along the myofibril (Frontera & Ochala, 2015).

## Key Terms

**Glycogen**
Glucose that is deposited and stored in bodily tissues, such as the liver and muscle cells; the storage form of carbohydrate.

**Myoglobin**
Protein-based molecule that carries oxygen molecules into the muscles.

**Myofibrils**
The contractile components of a muscle cell; the myofilaments (actin and myosin) are contained within a myofibril.

**Myofilaments**
The filaments of a myofibril; include actin and myosin.

**Actin**
The thin, stringlike, myofilament that acts along with myosin to produce muscular contraction.

**Myosin**
The thick myofilament that acts along with actin to produce muscular contraction.

**Sarcomere**
The structural unit of a myofibril composed of actin and myosin filaments between two Z-lines.

**Z-line**
The meeting point of each sarcomere.

## Images

**Figure 5-38: Structure of a fascicle**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF38.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-39: Structure of a myofibril**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF39.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533