---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Skeletal System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Skeletal System

The **skeletal system** serves many important functions. It provides the shape and form for our bodies, supports and protects our internal organs, provides the structure from which movement is created, produces blood for the body, and stores minerals (**Figure 5-9**) (Moore et al., 2018). It is important to note that the growth, maturation, and functionality of the skeletal system may be affected by physical activity and nutrition status (Hamill et al., 2015).

**Figure 5-9 The skeletal system

For example, poor nutrition and physical inactivity contribute to **osteoporosis**, which has a negative effect on skeletal health and human movement (Aspray & Hill, 2019). The skeletal system is a vital part of human movement through the interaction of the muscular and skeletal systems. Muscles are connected to bones by tendons. Bones form junctions that are connected by muscles and connective tissue. These junctions are known as **joints** and are the sites where movement occurs as a result of muscle contraction (Hamill et al., 2015).

## Key Terms

**Skeletal system**
A description of the bones of the body.

**Osteoporosis**
A condition of reduced bone mineral density, which increases risk of bone fracture.

**Joints**
The sites where two bones meet and movement occurs as a result of muscle contraction.

## Images

**Figure 5-9: The skeletal system**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%209781284200881_CH05_FIGF09.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533