---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Muscular System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### MUSCLE FIBER TYPES

The two main categories of muscle fibers—type I and type II—vary in their chemical and mechanical properties (**Table 5-3**) (Wilson et al., 2012). Type I muscle fibers are slower to produce maximal tension and more resistant to fatigue, which is why they are commonly referred to as “slow-twitch” muscle fibers. Conversely, type II are fast to produce tension but fatigue quickly, which is why they are commonly referred to as “fast-twitch” muscle fibers (Joumaa et al., 2015).

**TABLE 5-3 Muscle Fiber Types**

|  | Characteristic |
|---|---|
| Type I | More capillaries, mitochondria, and myoglobin |
| Increased oxygen delivery |
| Smaller in size |
| Less force produced |
| Slow to fatigue |
| Long-term contractions (stabilization) |
| “Slow twitch” |
| Type II | Fewer capillaries, mitochondria, and myoglobin |
| Decreased oxygen delivery |
| Larger in size |
| More force produced |
| Quick to fatigue |
| Short-term contractions (force and power) |
| “Fast twitch” |

Type I muscle fibers are smaller in size than type II but contain a large number of **capillaries**, mitochondria, and myoglobin, which allows for improved delivery of oxygen and leads to fatigue more slowly. Myoglobin is similar to hemoglobin—the red, oxygen-carrying pigment found in red blood cells—therefore, type I muscle fibers are often referred to as “red fibers” (Wilson et al., 2012). Type I fibers are important for muscles that need to produce long-term contractions necessary for stabilization and postural control (e.g., the deep musculature of the spine) (Moore et al., 2018; Wilson et al., 2012).

Type II muscle fibers are larger in size and produce maximal tension faster than type I fibers. Generally, type II fibers contain fewer capillaries, mitochondria, and myoglobin. Because of the limited myoglobin, they have a low oxidative capacity, are quick to fatigue, and are often referred to as “white fibers” (Wilson et al., 2012). These fibers are important for muscles that produce movements requiring high levels of force and power, such as the quadriceps when sprinting (Brunner et al., 2007).

## Key Terms

**Capillaries**
The smallest blood vessels and the site of exchange of elements between the blood and the tissues.