---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Nervous System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
**Integrative function** is the ability of the CNS to analyze and interpret sensory information to allow for proper decision making, which produces an appropriate response (Ludwig & Varacallo, 2019). Recall that the CNS receives its information from the PNS via the afferent pathway. **Motor function** is then the body’s response (via the efferent pathway) to that integrated sensory information, such as causing a muscle to contract when stretched too far or changing one’s walking pattern when transitioning from walking on a sidewalk to walking in the sand. **Figure 5-5** provides an example of sensory, integrative, and motor function working together to complete the task of reaching for a glass of water when feeling thirsty.

### MECHANORECEPTORS

Mechanoreceptors are specialized structures that respond to mechanical pressure within tissues and then transmit signals through sensory nerves (Dean et al., 2013). Mechanoreceptors respond to outside forces, such as touch, pressure, stretching, sound waves, and motion, and transmit impulses through sensory nerves, which, in turn, enable the body to detect touch and sounds and monitor the position of our muscles, bones, and joints. Mechanoreceptors are located in muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joint capsules and include the muscle spindles, Golgi tendon organs, and joint receptors (Dean et al., 2013; Karemaker, 2017).

**Muscle spindles** are sensory receptors within muscles that run parallel to the muscle fibers (**Figure 5-6**) and are sensitive to change in muscle length and rate of length change (Dean et al., 2013). When a specific muscle is stretched, the spindles within that muscle are also stretched, which in turn conveys information about its length to the CNS through sensory neurons. Once information from muscle spindles reaches the brain, it can then determine the position of various body parts.

Muscle spindles also help in regulating the contraction of muscles through the **stretch reﬂex** mechanism. The stretch reflex is a normal response by the body to a stretch stimulus in the muscle.

When a muscle spindle is stretched, an impulse is immediately sent to the spinal cord, and a response to contract the muscle is received within 1 to 2 milliseconds. The rapid neural response is designed as a protective mechanism to prevent overstretching and potential muscle damage (Kistemaker et al., 2013).

## Key Terms

**Integrative function**
The ability of the nervous system to analyze and interpret the sensory information to allow for proper decision-making, which produces an appropriate response.

**Motor function**
The neuromuscular (or nervous and muscular systems) response to the integrated sensory information.

**Muscle spindles**
Sensory receptors sensitive to change in length of the muscle and the rate of that change.

**Stretch reﬂex**
Neurological signal from the muscle spindle that causes a muscle to contract to prevent excessive lengthening.

## Images

**Figure 5-5: Sensory, integrative, and motor function**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-6: Muscle spindle**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533