---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Muscular System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### HELPFUL HINT

**Muscle Anatomy Flowchart**

Muscle: bundle of fascicles surrounded by epimysium (deep fascia) connective tissue

↓

Fascicle: bundles of muscle fibers surrounded by perimysium connective tissue

↓

Muscle fiber: a bundle of myofibrils surrounded by endomysium connective tissue

↓

Myofibril: a collection of repeating sarcomeres that contain myofilaments (actin and myosin)

↓

Sarcomere: a section of a myofibril between two Z-lines where muscle contraction physically occurs

↓

Myofilament: the individual protein structures, actin and myosin, that make up a myofibril

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

Two protein structures that are also important to muscle contraction are tropomyosin and troponin. Tropomyosin is located on the actin filament and blocks myosin-binding sites located on the actin filament, keeping myosin from attaching to actin when the muscle is in a relaxed state. Troponin, also located on the actin filament, plays a role in muscle contraction by providing binding sites for both calcium and tropomyosin when a muscle needs to contract (Kenney et al., 2020).                              

### NEURAL ACTIVATION

Skeletal muscles will not contract unless they are stimulated to do so by motor neurons. **Neural activation** represents the communication link between the nervous system and the muscular system. The nervous system communicates with muscle fibers through a specialized site called the **neuromuscular junction** (**Figure 5-40**). This junction is actually a small gap between the motor neuron and muscle cells known as a **synapse**. One motor neuron and the muscle fibers it innervates with (i.e., connects to) are known as a **motor unit** (Kenney et al., 2020).

## Key Terms

**Neural activation**
The nervous system’s signal that tells a muscle to contract.

**Neuromuscular junction**
The specialized site where the nervous system communicates directly with muscle fibers.

**Synapse**
A junction or small gap between the motor neuron and muscle cells.

**Motor unit**
A motor neuron and all of the muscle fibers that it innervates.

## Images

**Figure 5-40: Neuromuscular junctions**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF40.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533