---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Muscular System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Sliding Filament Theory

A muscle contraction is a shortening of the sarcomeres, which contain actin and myosin myofilaments. The **sliding ﬁlament theory** further describes how myosin (thick) and actin (thin) filaments slide past one another to produce a muscle contraction, shortening the entire length of the sarcomere and, concurrently, the muscle as a whole (**Figure 5-42**).

The steps in the muscle contraction are accomplished through a physiological process called **excitation-contraction coupling** (**Figure 5-43**) (Mackrill & Shiels, 2020).

	- The nerve impulse begins in the CNS and travels down the motor neuron, which is facilitated by sodium and potassium electrolytes, to the neuromuscular junction.

	- Acetylcholine is released into the neuromuscular junction, which then helps the nerve impulse cross the synapse into the muscle.

	- The nerve impulse travels into the muscle infrastructure stimulating a small organ called the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release the electrolyte calcium (Frontera & Ochala, 2015).

	- Calcium is then released into the muscle, stimulating a chain of events that results in the myosin heads binding to actin.

	- The myosin heads then pull the actin toward the sarcomere center, which slides the overlapping filaments past each other, shortening the entire muscle.

**Figure 5-43 Excitation-contraction coupling

## Key Terms

**Sliding ﬁlament theory**
The series of steps in muscle contraction involving how myosin (thick) and actin (thin) filaments slide past one another to produce a muscle contraction, shortening the entire length of the sarcomere.

**Excitation-contraction coupling**
The physiological process of converting an electrical stimulus to a muscle contraction.

## Images

**Figure 5-42: Sliding filament theory**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF42.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 5-43: Excitation-contraction coupling**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH05_FIGF43.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533