---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Nervous, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
- The PNS contains two subdivisions: the somatic and autonomic nervous systems.

	- The nervous system requires different electrolytes for proper function, which include sodium, potassium, magnesium, and water.

	- Motor skill development often occurs in three stages: cognitive, associative, and autonomous.

	- The nervous system develops as humans age from childhood to adulthood.

Skeletal System

	- The skeletal system provides support for the body and protects the internal organs.

	- The skeletal system has two divisions: axial and appendicular.

	- Human bones act as attachment sites and levers (rigid rods) to produce movement when muscles contract.

	- Bone growth occurs throughout life and remodels itself with specialized cells called osteoblasts and osteoclasts.

	- There are five categories of bones: long, short, flat, irregular, and sesamoid.

	- The vertebral column has five distinct regions: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacrum, and coccyx.

	- In between each vertebra is an intervertebral disc that acts as a shock absorber and assists with movement.

	- Joints are formed by one bone articulating with another and can be categorized by their shape, structure, and function.

	- Osteokinematic describes bone movement, and arthrokinematic describes movement at the joint surface.

	- Synovial joints are unique with a synovial capsule but also contain other connective tissues, such as ligaments and fascia that provide support.

	- Synovial joints have six classifications: gliding (plane), condyloid, hinge, saddle, pivot, and ball-and-socket.

	- Exercise and proper nutrition can have a major positive impact on bone mass with the aging adult.

Muscular System

	- The muscular system links the nervous and skeletal systems and generates force to move the human body.

	- Muscles have a complex structure that includes different layers of connective tissue that surround the contractile muscle fibers.

	- Myofibrils consist of repeating sarcomeres and the myofilaments actin and myosin, which create the muscle contraction described by the sliding filament theory. Adenosine triphosphate is also needed to create energy for this process.

	- Excitation-contraction coupling describes the steps in the muscle contraction process involving the nervous and muscular systems.

	- The electrolyte calcium and neurotransmitter acetylcholine are involved in the excitation-contraction coupling process.

	- The all-or-nothing principle describes how a motor unit either maximally contracts or does not contract at all.

	- Muscles involved with fine motor skills have motor units with fewer innervated fibers. Motor units involved in gross motor control have motor units with more innervated fibers.

	- Type I, slow-twitch, muscle fibers are smaller in size, produce less force, and are fatigue resistant.

	- Type II, fast-twitch, muscle fibers are larger in size, produce more force, and fatigue quickly.