---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: The Digestive System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Along the way, these three areas receive help from organs such as the **gall bladder**,** liver**, and pancreas, which produce enzymes and acids to help aid in the digestion of foods (Pantol, 2009; Patricia, 2019).

The actions of the digestive system generally consist of **motility**, which is the passage of food through the digestive tract and includes **mastication** (chewing), swallowing, digestion, and **peristalsis**. **Digestion** is the formal term used to describe the processing of food into a structure that can be absorbed. **Absorption** is the term used for the passage of already-digested food into the blood system to be processed for energy, nutrients, and tissue building (Patricia 2019). In addition to digestion and absorption of food, the GI system is the home of 70% to 80% of the body’s immune cells (Goodman & Fuller, 2015).

## Structures of the Digestive System

The structures of the digestive system include the oral cavity, upper GI tract, and lower GI tract. The head and neck are where the oral cavity resides, which processes food that is passed down the esophagus to the stomach. The **esophagus** and stomach are the beginning of the upper GI tract. Food from the stomach is passed through the small intestine and into the large intestine, and ultimately into the anal canal where it is excreted. Along the way, various mechanical processes, hormones, and enzymes from organs that contribute to digestion aid in the process.

### HEAD AND NECK

When we eat, food is taken in from the mouth through a process called **ingestion** (Pandol et al., 2015). The teeth, saliva, and tongue aid with ingestion as well as breaking down the food in a process called mastication (Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019). During the chewing process, the teeth break down the food and it is mixed with saliva, which has its own enzymes that help the process of degrading the food for the next step in the process (Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019) (**Figure 6-15**). Food that is ingested and undergoes mastication is ultimately swallowed and will pass through the upper GI tract and eventually into the lower GI tract (Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019).

## Key Terms

**Gall bladder**
An organ found below the liver, on the right side of the body, that receives bile from the liver and secretes it into the duodenum.

**Liver**
An organ in the upper-right abdominal cavity with numerous functions, including the production and secretion of bile, which is stored and concentrated in the gall bladder prior to release into the duodenum.

**Motility**
In the digestive system, refers to movements of the anatomical structures that allow contents to pass through.

**Mastication**
The mechanical process whereby the oral muscles break down food.

**Peristalsis**
The muscle action of the gastrointestinal system that pushes food through the body during digestion.

**Digestion**
Multistep process that describes the passage of food through the body.

**Absorption**
The process of nutrients being absorbed into the body during the digestive process.

**Esophagus**
The anatomical part of the digestive tract that allows food to pass from oral cavity to stomach.

**Ingestion**
The act of taking food, liquid, or other substances into the body in preparation for digestion.

## Images

**Figure 6-15: The digestive system—head and neck**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF15.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533