---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: The Digestive System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### UPPER GI TRACT

Swallowed food is passed from the esophagus, which is a muscular tube, into the stomach where there are high quantities of gastric juices that help with digestion (Pandol et al., 2015; Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019). The swallowed food is pushed through the esophagus into the stomach through muscular contractions, which are part of peristalsis (Pandol et al., 2015; Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019). The esophagus is a unique structure in that parts of it contract while others relax, which allows the passage of food. Once food passes into the stomach from the esophagus, the esophageal sphincter constricts to prevent food from the stomach from re-entering the esophagus (Goodman & Fuller, 2015).

In the stomach, food mixes with digestive juices creating **chyme**, and the high acidity of the stomach contents continues the digestive process and may kill bacteria (Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019). The stomach contracts when it is filled with food and gastric juices. Some of the gastric juices that are secreted include hydrochloric acid, mucus, and pepsinogen, which is used to digest protein (Pandol et al., 2015; Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019). Once the food in the stomach is thoroughly digested, contractions from the stomach push it through a valve (i.e., pyloric sphincter) into the small intestine (Patricia & Dhamoon, 2019).

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Although the esophageal sphincter is meant to prevent re-entering of food or gastric juices from the stomach, at times it fails and juices re-enter. Heartburn is a symptom that occurs as a result of gastric juices from the stomach entering the esophagus. These symptoms may be increased when lying flat after a meal (Goodman & Fuller, 2015).

The small intestine comprises the **duodenum**, **jejunum**, and **ileum** and resides between the stomach and the large intestine (**Figure 6-16**). It is called small, because it is relatively small compared to the large intestine. From a length perspective, the small intestine is roughly 6-7 meters (about 22 feet). Food is first passed into the duodenum, which is generally the first 10 inches. Food passes from the duodenum into the jejunum and then ultimately into the ileum. From the ileum, food passes into the large intestine.

## Key Terms

**Chyme**
A semifluid mass of digested food that is passed from the stomach to the small intestine.

**Duodenum**
Part of the small intestine that resides between the stomach and the jejunum.

**Jejunum**
Part of the small intestine that resides between the duodenum and the ileum.

**Ileum**
The final section of the small intestine, located between the jejunum and the cecum and leads to the large intestine.

## Images

**Figure 6-16: The upper GI tract**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF16.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533