---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: The Cardiorespiratory System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Generally speaking, resting heart rates for most of the population are between 60 and 100 beats per minute (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Reid et al., 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003). The body will increase its heart rate in response to exercise or physical activity and will lower its heart rate during deep sleep (Naves et al., 2019; Reid et al., 2014).

# GETTING TECHNICAL

Some well-conditioned athletes or clients who participate in endurance training or yoga may have a slower than normal resting heart rate (e.g., 40 to 60 beats per minute) as a result of those activities improving the heart’s ability to pump blood (Reimers et al., 2018).

The electrical conduction system of the heart consists of specialized cells that allow an electrical signal to be transmitted from the **sinoatrial (SA) node** through both atria and down into the ventricles (**Figure 6-5**). Thus, the electrical conduction system of the heart stimulates the myocardial (heart) cells to contract in a regular rhythmic pattern, often referred to as normal sinus rhythm (Brooks, 2000; Fox, 2006; Swain, 2014; Tortora, 2008; Vander et al., 2003).

The SA node, located in the right atrium, is referred to as “the pacemaker of the heart” because it initiates the electrical signal that causes the heart to beat. The internodal pathways transfer the impulse from the SA node to the **atrioventricular (AV) node**. The AV node is located between the atria and ventricles and delays the impulse before allowing it to move on to the ventricles. The delay in impulse allows the ventricles to fill with blood from the atria prior to contracting.

## Key Terms

**Sinoatrial (SA) node**
Located in the right atrium, this node initiates an electrical signal that causes the heart to beat.

**Atrioventricular (AV) node**
Located between the atria and ventricles, this node delays the impulse from the sinoatrial node before allowing it to pass to the ventricles.

## Images

**Figure 6-5: Conduction system of the heart**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_FIGF05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533