---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: The Endocrine System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Estrogen is produced primarily in the ovaries in the female, with small amounts produced in the adrenal glands in males. Women of reproductive age have significantly higher levels of estrogen than males, which gives rise to female secondary sexual characteristics, such as breast development and regulation of the menstrual cycle. Estrogen has many functions, but in particular, it has an influence on fat deposition around the hips, buttocks, and thighs.

Hormonal changes from exercise are generally acute in nature, thus training responses are limited to these short-term changes. Acute hormone secretions also seem to be influenced to a greater degree when training larger muscles. For example, the back squat exercise, when performed for five sets of 10 repetitions at 75% intensity, has been shown to increase testosterone levels for up to 45 minutes after training; however, the bench press was shown to not alter testosterone levels to the same amount as a squat when performed at the same training intensity (Geisler et al., 2019).

With regard to age, a reduction in testosterone levels does occur; however, other factors such as overall health and exercise levels may have an effect on the degree of change (Erenpreiss et al., 2019). Among aging men, it has been shown that testosterone levels are higher among those who are healthy when compared to those who have comorbidities or chronic diseases such as hypertension (high blood pressure), arthritis, and chronic respiratory problems (Erenpreiss et al., 2019). While exercise has been shown to increase hormone levels in older men, the increases are generally smaller than in younger men (Hayes & Elliott, 2019; Negaresh et al., 2019).

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

The pathway for testosterone-stimulating muscle growth and recovery begins at the hypothalamus, which would be stimulated by vigorous resistance training. In response, the hypothalamus secretes gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which travels to the pituitary gland and stimulates the release of luteinizing hormone. Luteinizing hormone travels to the testes and attaches to the Leydig cells, which ultimately release testosterone.

### GROWTH HORMONE

The name of this hormone has particular reference to its primary functions. Growth hormone is released from the pituitary gland in the brain and is regulated by the nearby hypothalamus. Growth hormone is stimulated by several factors, including estrogen, testosterone, deep sleep, and vigorous exercise (Kraemer & Ratamess, 2005; Leproult & Cauter, 2010). Growth hormone is primarily an anabolic hormone that is responsible for most of the growth and development during childhood up until puberty, when the primary sex hormones take over that control.

Growth hormone also increases the development of bone, muscle tissue, and protein synthesis; increases fat burning; and strengthens the immune system (McArdle et al., 2016). Evidence suggests that sleep deprivation may reduce growth hormone secretion, once again pointing to the value of getting adequate sleep (Leproult & Cauter, 2010). Growth hormone also travels to the liver and muscles to stimulate the release of insulin-like growth factor and mechano-growth factor respectively, both potent anabolic hormones (McArdle et al., 2016; Velloso, 2008).

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH06_UNNUN06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533