---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Cardiorespiratory, Endocrine, and Digestive Systems
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: The Endocrine System
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Thyroid Hormones and Insulin-Like Growth Factors

The thyroid gland is located in the anterior neck region and releases hormones into the bloodstream that control numerous functions in almost every organ in the body. One of the more important functions of thyroid hormones is their impact on metabolism. Similarly, the liver secretes a hormone that also helps regulate the metabolism of macronutrients and protein synthesis, known as insulin-like growth factors.

### INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTORS

**Insulin-like growth factors (IGF)** are a type of hormone (numerous subtypes exist) primarily responsible for anabolic functions, such as growth and development (Kraemer & Ratamess, 2005; Velosso, 2008). IGF is released from the liver and is responsible for protein synthesis, fat metabolism, growth, and development (Velosso, 2008). It is important to recognize that while hormones have specific effects on their target organs or tissues, they work collaboratively with other hormones. For example, muscle hypertrophy (muscle growth) and regeneration following exercise is thought to be the result of IGF secretion as well as other hormones, such as testosterone and growth hormones (Ahtiainen, 2011; Roberts et al., 2010; Velloso, 2008).

A unique characteristic of IGF is that is it also synthesized (made) and stored in muscles and tendons where it is referred to as mechano-growth factor (Kraemer & Ratamess, 2005; Roberts et al., 2010; Velloso, 2008). Mechano-growth factor is a potent anabolic hormone similar to IGF (Kraemer & Ratamess, 2005). As a result, mechano-growth factor is released in response to the overload of a muscle or tendon, which, in part, plays a role in growth, repair, and recovery (Ahtiainen, 2011; Kraemer & Castracane, 2015; Kraemer & Ratamess 2005; Philippou et al., 2007; Roberts et al., 2010; Velosso, 2008). An interesting finding related to IGF is that levels have been shown to increase up to 48 hours following resistance training and that local levels in muscles are not necessarily affected by age (Roberts et al., 2010).

#### TRAINING TIP

Evidence suggests that an emphasis on the eccentric (lowering or decelerating) phase of an exercise in which a weight is slowly returned back to the starting position will increase local IGF secretion of the muscles being overloaded (Heinemeier et al., 2007; Kraemer & Castracane, 2015; Philippou et al., 2007; Velloso, 2008).

### THYROID HORMONE

The thyroid gland is located at the base of the neck just below the thyroid cartilage, sometimes called the Adam’s apple. This gland releases vital hormones that are primarily responsible for numerous physiological functions involved in the regulation of heart rate, body temperature, and metabolism, among many other functions (Armstrong, 2018).

It is important that the right amounts of thyroid hormones are secreted and that levels are not too high or low. As a result, the hypothalamus and pituitary gland play a role in maintaining normal levels. For example, if thyroid hormone levels are too low, the hypothalamus signals the pituitary gland to release a certain amount of thyroid-stimulating hormone.

## Key Terms

**Insulin-like growth factors (IGF)**
Anabolic hormone produced by the liver, which is responsible for growth and development.