---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Motor Behavior
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Motor Behavior

**Motor behavior** is the HMS response to internal and external environmental stimuli. The study of motor behavior examines the manner by which the nervous, skeletal, and muscular systems interact to produce skilled movement using sensory information from internal and external environments. Studying motor behavior represents the collective study of motor control, motor learning, and motor development (Schmidt & Lee, 1999). 

**Motor control** is the ability to initiate and correct purposeful controlled movements and involves mechanisms used by the central nervous system to assimilate and integrate sensory information with previous experiences (Newton, 2003; Rose, 1997). Motor control is concerned with the central nervous system structures that are involved with motor behavior to produce movement (Rose, 1997).

**Motor learning** is the use of these processes through practice and experience, leading to a relatively permanent change in one’s capacity to produce skilled movements (Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2000). Anytime a new physical skill is learned and practiced, motor learning is occurring. 

**Motor development **is then defined as the cumulative changes in motor behavior, over time, throughout the life span (Gabbard, 2008). Essentially, individuals’ motor development represents every physical ability they have learned over their lifetime, from rolling over for the first time as an infant to performing complex movements for athletic competition as an adult and beyond.

## Motor Control

To move in an organized and efficient manner, the HMS must exhibit precise control over its collective segments. This segmental control is an integrated process involving neural, skeletal, and muscular components to produce appropriate motor responses. This process—and the study of these movements—is known as motor control and focuses on the involved structures and mechanisms used by the central nervous system to integrate internal and external sensory information with previous experiences to produce a skilled motor response.

Motor control is concerned with the neural structures that are involved with motor behavior and how they produce movement (Coker, 2004; Nordin et al., 2017; Rose, 1997; Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2000). Essentially, motor learning and development are required for an individual to have proper motor control. Fitness professionals play a key role in the development of their clients’ motor control through proper instruction during exercise and fitness endeavors.

### MUSCLE SYNERGIES

One of the most important concepts in motor control is that muscles are recruited by the nervous system in groups, known as **muscle synergies** (Newton, 2003; Rose, 1997; Singh et al., 2018). There is never a time where only one single muscle is activated alone. This makes controlling movement more efficient by allowing muscles and joints to operate as functional units (Bizzi & Cheung 2013).

## Key Terms

**Motor behavior**
Motor response to internal and external environmental stimuli.

**Motor control**
How the central nervous system integrates internal and external sensory information with previous experiences to produce a motor response.

**Motor learning**
Integration of motor control processes through practice and experience, leading to a relatively permanent change in the capacity to produce skilled motor behavior.

**Motor development**
Change in skilled motor behavior over time throughout the life span.

**Muscle synergies**
Groups of muscles that are recruited simultaneously by the central nervous system to provide movement.