---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Human Movement Science
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Human Movement Science

Movement represents the integrated functioning of three main systems within the human body: the nervous system, the skeletal system, and the muscular system. These collective components and structures represent the **human movement system (HMS)** (**Figure 7-1**). Although separate in structure and function, the HMS relies on a collaborative effort to form interdependent links that form a functional **kinetic chain**. For example, an individual’s arm, shoulder, and spine are interconnected segments that function together to perform movement.

If any part of the kinetic chain is injured or not functioning properly, the entire link is compromised, resulting in less than optimal performance. Body segments and their movements must be coordinated to allow for the efficient transfer of energy and power throughout the body when moving from one body segment to the next. This concept of how the functioning of one segment of the body can impact other areas is referred to as the **regional interdependence model **(Sueki et al., 2013). This chapter focuses on how the HMS works interdependently to learn and produce efficient human movement.

## STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Regional interdependence emphasizes the importance of integrated HMS functioning. For example, a client with normal functioning muscular and nervous systems should be able to complete a front shoulder raise through the shoulder joint’s full range of motion (ROM). However, if there was articular (joint) system stiffness, the movement may not be completed through the full ROM, despite a normally functioning muscular and nervous system. On the other hand, if the nervous system that supplies the message to the deltoid (shoulder muscle) was not working properly, a client would not be able to raise their arm despite having normal articular movement and an intact muscle.

## Key Terms

**Human movement system (HMS)**
The collective components and structures that work together to move the body: muscular, skeletal, and nervous systems.

**Kinetic chain**
A concept that describes the human body as a chain of interdependent links that work together to perform movement.

**Regional interdependence model**
The concept describing the integrated functioning of multiple body systems or regions of the body.

## Images

**Figure 7-1: Human movement system**
Alt: Human movement system
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533