---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Planes of Motion
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### THE SAGITTAL PLANE

The **sagittal plane** is an imaginary line that bisects the body into right and left sides. Sagittal plane joint motion occurs around a medial-lateral axis, as is seen when bending at the knees. Movements in the sagittal plane include flexion and extension (**Figure 7-5**). **Flexion **is a bending movement in which the relative angle between two adjacent segments decreases. **Extension** is a straightening movement in which the relative angle between two adjacent segments increases (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Levangie et al., 2019).

**Figure 7-5Flexion and extension

##### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

**Hyperextension** is the extension of a joint beyond the normal limit or ROM and may result in injury. The term *hyperextension* is reserved for movements where normal extension values have been exceeded and should not be used to describe someone who has full available extension ROM.

## Key Terms

**Sagittal plane**
An imaginary bisector that divides the body into left and right halves.

**Flexion**
A bending movement in which the relative angle between two adjacent segments decreases.

**Extension**
A straightening movement in which the relative angle between two adjacent segments increases.

**Hyperextension**
Extension of a joint beyond the normal limit or range of motion.

## Images

**Figure 7-5: Flexion and extension**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20NASM_CH7_Figure_Flexion_Extension.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533