---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Muscle Actions
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### ISOKINETIC

During isokinetic muscle actions, the muscle shortens at a constant speed over the full ROM. An isokinetic muscle action requires the use of expensive and sophisticated equipment that measures the amount of force generated by the muscles and adjusts the resistance (load) so that no matter how much muscular tension is produced, movement speed remains constant. In other words, the harder an individual pushes or pulls, the more resistance they feel. During a full isokinetic contraction, the tension in the muscle is at its maximum throughout the whole ROM, which is believed to improve strength and endurance. However, the types of movements that are able to be performed on isokinetic machines are rather limited, and these machines often are only seen in rehabilitation clinics or exercise physiology laboratories.

### THE MUSCLE ACTION SPECTRUM

Because practically every exercise consists of an eccentric, isometric, and concentric muscle action to complete one repetition, the movement through those muscle actions is referred to as the **muscle action spectrum**. A dumbbell curl exercise is a clear example to illustrate this concept. The initial movement requires the biceps brachii to shorten to generate enough force to overcome the weight of the dumbbell in the individual’s hand (i.e., the force of gravity pulling the dumbbell’s mass toward the ground), causing the elbows to flex and the dumbbells to move up toward the front of the shoulder (**Figure 7-9**). This is the concentric phase of the exercise.

Once the dumbbells are raised to the front of the shoulder, the individual holds this position. Because the length of the muscle does not change while generating force to hold this position, it is considered the isometric portion of the exercise. As the individual lowers the dumbbells back to the starting position, the biceps muscles must now generate forces while lengthening to decelerate the force of the dumbbells against the pull of gravity; this is the eccentric portion of the exercise (**Figure 7-10**).

## Key Terms

**Muscle action spectrum**
The full range of eccentric, isometric, and concentric muscle contractions required to perform a movement.

## Images

**Figure 7-9: Dumbbell biceps curl—concentric motion**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF09.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 7-10: Dumbbell biceps curl—eccentric motion**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF10.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533