---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Muscles are influenced by outside forces from a multitude of directions. To compensate, muscles produce corresponding forces in groups to move bones and joints, known as force-couple actions. However, the amount of force that can be produced depends on leverage. Leverage directly affects rotary motion and torque, and modifying leverage may be used as a means of exercise progression or regression. Further to this point, advanced exercises, such as plyometrics, take advantage of the mechanical and neurological properties of the muscle and tendon using the stretch-shortening cycle, which increases force production and power.

Each system of the HMS is interdependent. All of the segments and processes must work together to gather information from internal and external environments to create and learn movements. The body uses proprioception, sensorimotor integration, and muscle synergies to create efficient movement. Then, repeated practice, as well as internal and external feedback, allows this efficient movement to be reproduced.

### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 7 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 7 Audio Review

**00:0013:20**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Movement is described in three dimensions that are based on planes, which include the sagittal, frontal, and transverse planes.

	- Osteokinematics describes the observable movement of a limb, whereas arthrokinematics describes the movement taking place at the joint itself.

	- Movement is described using biomechanical terminology that is universal to all professions in the allied health industry.

	- The sagittal plane is an imaginary line that bisects the body into right and left sides. Movements in the sagittal plane include flexion and extension and plantar flexion and dorsiflexion of the foot and ankle.

	- The frontal plane bisects the body to create front and back halves. Movements in the frontal plane include abduction and adduction of the limbs (relative to the trunk), lateral flexion of the spine, and eversion and inversion at the foot and ankle complex.

	- The transverse plane bisects the body to create upper and lower halves. Movements in the transverse plane include internal rotation and external rotation for the limbs, right and left rotation for the head and trunk, horizontal abduction and horizontal adduction of the limbs, and radioulnar pronation and supination.