---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

In the powerlifting world, athletes competing in the bench press will often rapidly lower the bar toward their chest before pressing it back up. This technique, while not recommended for everyday exercisers because it is potentially dangerous, uses the integrated performance paradigm to add a bit of extra force to the concentric phase of the lift.

## Force-Velocity Curve

The force-velocity curve describes the inverse relationship between force and velocity and refers to a muscle’s ability to produce tension at differing contraction velocities. As the velocity of a concentric muscle action increases, its ability to produce force decreases, while the ability to produce force increases as the velocity of a concentric contraction decreases (Levangie et al., 2019).

For example, during a heavy barbell back squat, the muscles produce a high amount of force; however, the movement is rather slow. Conversely, during a squat jump exercise, the velocity of movement is high; however, the force output is low (when compared to a heavy barbell back squat).

During an eccentric muscle action, as the contraction velocity increases, the ability to develop force also increases. This is believed to be the result of the use of the elastic component of the connective tissue surrounding and within the muscle—similar to the loading phase of the stretch-shortening cycle (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Radnor et al., 2017). Simply put, the faster the eccentric contraction, the more force the muscle is capable of decelerating. When plotted on a graph, the inverse relationship between eccentric and concentric contraction velocities and the amount of force they produce displays the force-velocity curve (**Figure 7-17**).

## Images

**Figure 7-17: Force-velocity curve**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF17.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533