---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Muscular Force
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Muscular Leverage and Arthrokinematics

The amount of force that the HMS can produce relies on not only motor unit recruitment and muscle size but also the lever system of the joint. The musculoskeletal system is composed of bones, muscles, tendons, and ligaments, all of which create a series of levers and pulleys that generate force against external objects.

Skeletal muscles are attached to bones by tendons and produce movement by bending the skeleton at movable joints. Recall that joint motion is caused by muscles pulling on bones; muscles cannot actively push. Particular attachments of muscles to bones will determine how much force the muscle is capable of generating. For example, the quadriceps muscles can produce more force than muscles of the hand.

Most motion uses the principle of levers. A lever consists of a rigid bar that pivots around a stationary pivot point (fulcrum). In the human body, the fulcrum is the joint axis, bones are the levers, muscles create the motion (effort), and resistance can be the weight of a body part, or the weight of an object (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Levangie et al., 2019).

Levers are classified as first, second, and third class, depending on the relations among the fulcrum, the effort, and the resistance (**Figure 7-23**). First-class levers have the fulcrum in the middle, like a seesaw. Nodding the head is an example of a first-class lever, with the top of the spinal column as the fulcrum (Levangie et al., 2019).

Second-class levers have a resistance in the middle with the fulcrum and effort on either side, similar to a load in a wheelbarrow where the axle and wheel are the fulcrum points. The body acts as a second-class lever when one engages in a full-body push-up or calf raise. Using the calf raise exercise as an example, the ball of the foot is the fulcrum, the body weight is the resistance, and the effort is applied by the calf musculature (Levangie et al., 2019).

## Images

**Figure 7-23: Lever examples**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF23.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533