---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Human Movement Science
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Human Movement Science
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
## Biomechanics

**Biomechanics** is the study of mechanical laws or principles relating to movement. In other words, biomechanics uses scientific principles of physics to study how the body creates movement at the joints, especially in the context of exercise and sport. **Kinesiology** is another formal discipline that studies movement. While kinesiology is still concerned with the principles of biomechanics, it investigates movement further because it additionally relates to human anatomy and physiology.

The exploration of human movement science focuses on the various motions that the HMS produces and the forces that act on it (Hamill & Knutzen, 2003; Levangie et al., 2019). Fitness and sport training require a strong understanding of basic anatomical terminology, planes of motion, joint motions, muscle actions, force-couples, levers, forces, and the intramuscular relationship between force and velocity.

## Biomechanical Terminology

It is important for fitness professionals to understand the terminology used in the study of biomechanics and kinesiology. This prepares them with a better understanding of and ability to apply the scientific principles behind assessing clients’ movements and implementing exercise programs with clients.

It is important to keep in mind that biomechanical terms always refer to the body in the

**anatomic position** (**Figure 7-2**). The anatomic position is when the body is in a standing posture, with the arms hanging down by the sides and palms facing forward. This position is important because it gives a universal point of reference from which all allied health professionals can accurately discuss human biomechanics.

## Key Terms

**Biomechanics**
The science concerned with the internal and external forces acting on the human body and the effects produced by these forces.

**Kinesiology**
Study of movement as it relates to anatomy and physiology.

**Anatomic position**
The position with the body erect, the arms at the sides, and the palms forward. It is the position of reference for anatomic nomenclature.

## Images

**Figure 7-2: The anatomic position**
Alt: Anatomic locations.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH07_FIGF02.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533