---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Energy and Mechanical Work
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
#### GETTING TECHNICAL

**What Is Lactic Acid?**

During periods of high-intensity exercise, ATP is needed faster than oxygen can be delivered by the cardiorespiratory system. Therefore, the body relies mostly on the ATP-PC system and glycolysis for energy when intensities push toward maximal levels. As pyruvate accumulates in an anaerobic environment, it is quickly converted to lactate, releasing a free hydrogen ion in the process.

These hydrogen ions contribute to a decrease in muscle pH, which is known as acidosis. This acidosis can lead to some of the feelings of pain and fatigue associated with intense exercise because the hydrogen ions that lower pH can interfere with muscle contraction. Because of this, tissue pH shifts toward becoming acidic; the lactate and hydrogen ions produced during anaerobic glycolysis are often collectively termed *lactic acid*.

However, lactate is not a true “waste product” in the same way as CO~2~. Once it has been removed from soft tissue cells and enters the bloodstream, instead of being removed from the body, it is processed by the liver in a separate metabolic process called the Cori cycle. During the Cori cycle, ATP is used to convert lactate in the opposite direction back to pyruvate and subsequently glucose (Cori & Cori, 1929). This glucose is then released back into the bloodstream to be used again. Because of this, the Cori cycle is highly important in helping keep the body’s pH balanced.

### THE OXIDATIVE SYSTEM

The most complex of the three energy systems is the oxidative system—a process that uses oxygen to convert food substrates into ATP (**Figure 8-7**). This process is called **oxidative phosphorylation**, and it is defined as an **aerobic **process because it needs oxygen to complete the reactions. There are three substrates that are used in the oxidative system: free fatty acids, the pyruvate created during glycolysis, and amino acids that have undergone **deamination**.

## Key Terms

**Oxidative phosphorylation**
A series of reactions inside the mitochondria that uses oxygen to produce adenosine triphosphate.

**Aerobic**
Processes relating to, involving, or requiring oxygen.

**Deamination**
The breakdown of amino acids into substrates that can be used for energy metabolism.

## Images

**Figure 8-7: The oxidative system**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533