---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### INTRODUCTION TO THE LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

The body is an intact (i.e., closed) system. Like all other systems in nature, the body must follow the **first law of thermodynamics**, which states that energy can neither be created nor destroyed, only recycled or converted from one form into another. In humans, this is referred to as the concept of energy balance. Put briefly, the energy entering the body in the form of **macronutrients **and coming out of the body is always accounted for by changes in mass (i.e., a person’s scale weight). If someone consistently expends more energy than they consume, that person will lose mass (weight). If someone consistently consumes more energy than they expend, that person will gain mass (weight). Therefore, all of the energy someone consumes is either used to perform bodily functions or stored within the body (typically as body fat).

#### GETTING TECHNICAL

**Carbon In – Carbon Out **

All life on earth is carbon-based, meaning that carbon is the element that primarily gives living things their physical mass. The “energy” contained in food is located within the molecular bonds that connect carbon and other elements in various ways to form carbohydrate, protein, and fat molecules (i.e., the edible forms of organic matter). Other elements in organic matter—such as oxygen, phosphorous, nitrogen, and hydrogen— have little to no contribution to physical mass. Water, which does contribute to a living thing’s *scale weight*, is contained *within *the physical mass (i.e., inside cells and blood); it is not part of it. When organic matter is consumed by an animal, molecular bonds are broken and reformed numerous times during metabolism—converting the source macronutrients into numerous intermediate forms of organic matter—on the way to forming the ATP molecules that muscles and organs use directly as their “energy currency” to power function.

Energy is stored in the human body in the same way it is contained within food—in the molecular bonds of carbohydrate (glucose and glycogen), fat (body fat), and protein (muscle and other soft tissues) structures. Per the first law of thermodynamics, a body’s mass increases when it consumes more energy than it uses because that energy must be physically contained within the molecular bonds of carbon-based organic matter. Simply put, if energy isn’t used, it is stored away for later, and there can be no energy stored away for later without the accompanying increase in carbon-based body mass to contain that energy.

Body mass is then lost in only one specific way. As metabolism works to convert both food and bodily stores (i.e., glycogen and fat) to ATP for use, carbon dioxide (CO~2~) is formed as the main waste product. Other than physically removing tissue through surgery, exhaling CO~2~ is the only way carbon is removed from the body. As the body exhales CO~2~, the energy contained within the CO~2~’s carbon-oxygen molecular bonds is released back into the external environment where it is taken up by plants and entered back into the greater food supply. Energy is never created or destroyed; it is just transferred from one form of carbon-based organic matter to another. In the human body’s case, energy starts as food, is then converted to various forms within the body during metabolism, and is finally released back to the environment as CO~2~ during exhalation.

## Key Terms

**First law of thermodynamics**
Energy cannot be created or destroyed but merely converted from one form to another.

**Macronutrients**
Food substances required in large amounts to supply energy and include protein, carbohydrate, and fat.