---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Introduction to Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics

The human body needs a constant supply of energy to function properly. Those energy requirements can change, and exercise places unique demands on the body’s ability to supply energy. In addition to increasing energy demand, exercise also requires the body to handle additional metabolic by-products.

The food we eat contains carbohydrates, proteins, and fats, which are needed by our cells to produce energy and function properly. The energy stored in these food sources, through a series of chemical reactions, is converted to a high-energy compound called **adenosine triphosphate (ATP)**, which serves as the main form of energy in the human body (**Figure 8-1**). The role of energy metabolism during exercise involves understanding how energy is supplied, which energy systems are used during exercise, how quickly energy can be supplied, and how cells generate ATP.

## Bioenergetics and Metabolism 

Energy metabolism, or **bioenergetics**, is the study of how energy is transformed through various biochemical reactions. Energy is required to sustain life, support exercise, and pro­mote recovery from physical activity or structured exercise. The term **metabolism **refers to all the chemical reactions that occur in the body to maintain itself. As mentioned earlier, the main sources of chemical energy for humans are carbohydrates, fats, and protein. **Exercise metabolism **refers to the examination of bioenergetics as it relates to the unique physiological changes and demands placed on the body during exercise.

## Key Terms

**Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)**
A high-energy molecule that serves as the main form of energy in the human body; known as the energy currency of the body.

**Bioenergetics**
The study of energy in the human body.

**Metabolism**
All of the chemical reactions that occur in the body to maintain itself.

**Exercise metabolism**
The examination of bioenergetics as it relates to the unique physiologic changes and demands placed on the body during exercise.

## Images

**Figure 8-1: Basic overview of energy metabolism**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH08_FIGF01.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533