---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Exercise Metabolism and Bioenergetics
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Energy and Mechanical Work
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Finally, if there is a lot of carbohydrate (glucose) available, the body will use some of that instead, which will decrease the total amount of fat used to make ATP.

If oxidative phosphorylation is starting from a carbohydrate food source, it must first be broken down into glucose and then converted to pyruvate through glycolysis. Essentially, not only is glycolysis its own anaerobic energy system, but it is also the first step in the aerobic metabolism of glucose. When there is enough oxygen present, pyruvate is not converted to lactate. Instead, it is further broken down to acetyl CoA and enters the CAC. The complete metabolism (anaerobic and aerobic) of a single glucose molecule produces between 35 and 40 ATP (McArdle et al., 2010). Additionally, if both carbohydrates and fats are depleted to the point that amino acids are being relied on directly for energy (e.g., during extreme starvation), they are also broken down and metabolized aerobically.

##### GETTING TECHNICAL

Amino acids are very rarely deaminated and converted to acetyl CoA directly for oxidative phosphorylation. Most of the time, when amino acids are called on as an energy source, they are first converted to glucose or ketone bodies via gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis. Those converted substrates then enter their respective carbohydrate- or fat-based metabolic pathways.

#### ELECTRON TRANSPORT CHAIN

The ETC is a vastly complex process that occurs in the inner mitochondrial membrane after the CAC has removed the electrons from acetyl CoA. In this process, protein complexes create a gradient of stored hydrogen ions that allow the electrons freed by the CAC to move through them. When ATP levels fall and ADP levels rise, the hydrogen gradient is “harvested” by a protein called ATP synthase to turn ADP and oxygen into ATP and water (Everman et al., 2011). As a result of this efficient handling of the molecules, the ETC can generate a relatively large amount of ATP with minimal waste products.

##### HELPFUL HINT

The CAC (i.e., Krebs cycle) breaks down acetyl CoA, yielding a few ATP, CO2 as a waste product, and free electrons.

The free electrons then enter the ETC, driving a cycle of chemical reactions that produce more ATP and the waste product of water.