---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Carbohydrates
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
The GI value of foods may also be helpful to individuals with diabetes in managing their blood sugar levels (Harvard Medical School, 2015).

However, there are some limitations with the GI scale, because it does not account for the amount of carbohydrate eaten or other foods that may be consumed at the same time. It is simply a measure of the glycemic response to the carbohydrate source when eaten by itself. In reality, the amount of carbohydrates eaten in conjunction with other macronutrients eaten at the same meal will affect the glycemic response. For clients who are concerned with the glycemic response of a carbohydrate source, a more meaningful measure may be the GL.

### GLYCEMIC LOAD (GL)

The GL of a carbohydrate source accounts for both the glycemic index of the food and the amount that is typically eaten as a serving. For example, popcorn has a high glycemic index of 72. However, a 1-cup serving of popped popcorn has only 30 calories and approximately 6 g of carbohydrates, which does not provide a large amount of glucose. Thus, the GL of 1 cup of popcorn will be low. Rather than focusing on the GI alone, it is more helpful to consider the type of carbohydrate (simple vs. complex), the amount being consumed, and the presence of other macronutrients (fat and protein) to understand the overall glycemic response of a particular food. In reality, the GI and GL of carbohydrates may only be meaningful for a subset of clients and in limited situations. For example, clients who are training for a specific sport and/or those who have multiple training sessions per day may benefit from posttraining consumption of high-glycemic carbohydrates for rapid glycogen replenishment. Diabetic individuals may benefit from knowing which carbohydrates are high and low GI, although total carbohydrate intake still remains far more important. For most clients who do not have diabetes and are not in rigorous training for sports performance, these measurements may be of limited value.

## Dietary Carbohydrate Needs

Carbohydrate needs for clients vary and depend on their size, energy needs, and level of physical activity, as well as any medical conditions, such as diabetes. Fitness professionals should be aware of this, because carbohydrate requirements will differ between clients. In addition, despite the popularity of low-carb and ketogenic diets in the mainstream media, carbohydrates remain essential for optimal performance in sports and exercise (Kerksick et al., 2018). Numerous studies have shown that reduced carbohydrate diets can impair both maximal effort during high-intensity exercise and performance in endurance sports (Burke et al., 2017; Cermak et al., 2013; Stepto et al., 2016).