---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 9
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
### REVIEW PODCAST

Click the play button below to listen to the Chapter 9 Review Podcast where we discuss the most important concepts that were covered!

On screen audio. 

###### Chapter 9 Audio Review

**00:0013:46**OptionsDownload

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Registered and licensed dietitians and nutritionists are authorized to provide nutrition counseling, medical nutrition therapy, and meal plans.

	- Fitness professionals (who are not also registered or licensed dietitians or nutritionists) can provide general nutrition guidelines, direct clients to credible nutrition resources, refer clients to dietitians and nutritionists, and provide accountability and support with dietary changes.

	- Credible and reliable nutrition information includes peer-reviewed research and scholarly sources.

	- Protein is comprised of 20 amino acids; 9 are essential and must be obtained via the diet.

	- The role of protein is the synthesis of tissues, organs, hormones, enzymes, and peptides.

	- Dietary sources of complete proteins include soy and animal foods, such as meat, poultry, seafood, and dairy. Plant-based, incomplete protein foods include legumes, grains, and vegetables.

	- Protein contains 4 calories per gram.

	- The RDA for protein is 0.8 g/kg bodyweight (considered a minimum to maintain nitrogen balance).

	- The AMDR for protein is 10% to 35% of total calories.

	- Carbohydrates include simple sugars, complex carbohydrates, glycogen, and fiber.

	- Carbohydrates are an important energy source of exercising individuals and athletes.

	- Dietary sources of carbohydrates include plant foods and dairy, including grains, vegetables, legumes, fruit, milk, and yogurt.

	- Simple sugars include the monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, galactose) and disaccharides (lactose, sucrose, maltose).

	- Complex carbohydrates are long chains of glucose units called polysaccharides, which are slower to digest and raise blood glucose levels slowly.

	- Sources of complex carbohydrates include starches, legumes, and vegetables.

	- The glycemic index reflects the effect of a carbohydrate on blood sugar levels; low GI foods cause smaller rises in blood glucose compared to high GI foods.

	- Glycemic load is a better indicator of a carbohydrate’s effect on blood sugar levels, because it accounts for the glycemic index and the quantity of carbohydrates consumed.

	- Carbohydrates contain 4 calories per gram.

	- Glycogen is the storage form of carbohydrates in animals and humans. Glycogen is stored in the liver and skeletal muscle.

	- Fiber is indigestible carbohydrates associated with various health benefits and includes both soluble and insoluble fiber.

	- The AMDR for carbohydrate is 45% to 65% of calories in the diet.

	- Fiber recommendations: 25–28 g of fiber per day for women (aged 19–50 years) and 30–34 g of fiber per day for men aged 19–50 years.

	- Lipids are commonly referred to as fats and include triglycerides, phospholipids, and sterols.

	- Saturated fat sources include animal fats, full-fat dairy, coconut, and palm oil.

	- Polyunsaturated fat sources include omega-6 (nuts, seeds, oils), omega-3 (fatty fish, flaxseed, walnuts, chia seeds, fortified milk/eggs, dairy from grass-fed cows, and green vegetables).

	- Monounsaturated fat sources include olives, olive oil, avocado, peanuts, and canola.

	- Phospholipid sources include meats, egg yolks, seafood, poultry, soybeans, and grains.

	- Sterols sources include cholesterol from animal foods, egg yolks, and plant sterols.