---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Nutrition Strategies
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
# Nutrition Strategies

Every client is different in that each has his or her own genetic profile and lifestyle that can influence various factors, including **basal metabolic rate (BMR)**, overall body composition, height, weight, and the propensity to gain or lose weight. Some individuals may find that they can lose or gain weight more easily compared to others of the same height, weight, age, or build, and it is important to note that there are multiple factors that influence both weight and weight management.

## Factors That Influence Weight Management

Genetic influence is one factor that affects and influences a client’s ability to manage weight. However, their physical activity, energy intake (diet), sleep, hormones, and medications also play important roles. Fitness professionals should keep these in mind when working with clients looking to lose or gain weight. Some factors, such as diet, physical activity, and sleep, may be more easily modifiable. However, others, such as **endocrine (hormonal) disorders** and medications, may significantly affect weight and may require a referral to a qualified medical professional.

### LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

Energy intake is one of the factors that influences weight management; some might argue that it is perhaps the most important factor. Regardless, it is certainly a major component in managing weight, whether for weight gain or weight loss. The **first law of thermodynamics** states that energy cannot be created or destroyed in a system (**Figure 9-8**), it can only be converted from one form to another (Hall et al., 2012).

## Key Terms

**Basal metabolic rate (BMR)**
The amount of energy required to maintain the body at rest.

**Endocrine (hormonal) disorders**
When the body produces too little or too much of an endocrine hormone.

**First law of thermodynamics**
Energy cannot be created or destroyed but merely converted from one form to another.

## Images

**Figure 9-8: Energy conversion within the body**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH09_FIGF08.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533