---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Micronutrients and Hydration
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Fitness professionals should educate their clients by reinforcing the importance of adequate hydration both prior to, during, and after training. They should also be able to recognize symptoms of dehydration and adjust training to make sure fluid levels are appropriately addressed. In most healthy adults, their hydration status can be determined by the color of their urine. Urine that is a very light to pale yellow indicates adequate hydration; darker shades signify inadequate hydration or other medical issues (**Figure 9-7**).

However, clients with heavy training regimens will likely need to be more cognizant of fluid losses and diligent with rehydration to avoid risk of dehydration. Fluid losses during training can compound the effects of those already experiencing dehydration. Because of this, clients should be educated on the importance of hydrating adequately prior to exercise, in addition to hydrating during and after workout sessions. During exercise, a weight loss of more than 4%, due to fluid losses, can lead to **heat exhaustion**, **heatstroke**, and death in severe cases (Maughan & Noakes, 1991). Therefore, prevention of dehydration before and during exercise remains of critical importance. Clients who engage in intense training or endurance sports should not rely on thirst as an indicator of hydration status but rather follow a recommended hydration protocol as outlined (**Table 9-19**).

#### TRY THIS

**Hydration Posttraining/Postevent**

Current sports nutrition guidelines recommend that fluid replenishment posttraining of an event should be in the range of 125% (1.25 times) the amount of weight lost during a training session or game.

This means that if there is a 2 lb (0.9 kg) loss in body weight from training, the athlete should consume 32 oz × 1.25 = 40 oz (1.18 L) of fluid to replenish this loss (2 lb = 32 oz).

### HYDRATION AND SPORTS DRINKS

**Sports drinks** are often perceived as a go-to source for hydration by many clients. However, they may not be necessary for most clients who train at low-to-moderate intensities for less than an hour per day. Sports drinks are designed to replenish fluid and **electrolytes** and provide a source of carbohydrate during prolonged periods of intense training.

**TABLE 9-19 Hydration Recommendations**

| Hydration Recommendation | Timing |
|---|---|
| 16 oz (500 mL) of water or sports drink | Evening prior to event
	Morning of an event |
| 13–20 oz (400–600 mL) | 20–30 minutes prior to event start |
| 12–16 oz of fluid | Every 10–15 minutes of exercise (especially in hot and humid climates) |
| Water | Activity <60 minutes (unless in warm temperatures and/or with heavy perspiration in which a sports drink may be necessary) |
| Sports drink or electrolyte tablets mixed with water | Exercise >90 minutes (unless in warm temperatures and/or with heavy perspiration) |
| 1.25 times the amount of weight lost during a training session or game | Postgame/training |
| Data from Kerksick et al., 2018. |

## Key Terms

**Heat exhaustion**
A condition that occurs when the body becomes overheated. It can occur from dehydration in a hot climate, and symptoms include heavy sweating, rapid pulse, low blood pressure, nausea, dizziness, and muscle cramps.

**Heatstroke**
A condition that can develop if heat exhaustion is not treated quickly. Heatstroke symptoms include headache, fever, confusion and disorientation, and flushed skin. Heatstroke is a medical emergency and can be fatal if not quickly treated.

**Sports drink**
Drink with a combination of carbohydrate and/or electrolytes used for rehydration and carbohydrate replenishment during physical activity; may be isotonic, hypotonic, or hypertonic.

**Electrolytes**
Minerals that have an electrical charge to help transmit nerve impulses throughout the body, such as sodium, potassium, and chloride.

## Images

**Figure 9-7: Urine color chart**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH09_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533