---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 9
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
Current guidelines recommend that 45% to 65% of calories come from carbohydrates. The third category of macronutrients, lipids, are comprised of triglycerides, phospholipids, and sterols. Lipids provide 9 calories per gram and are a concentrated but important source of energy for active individuals. Some types of lipids, such as monounsaturated fats and the polyunsaturated omega-3 fats, are associated with health benefits, such as reduced inflammation and heart health. Other lipids, such as manufactured trans fats, can contribute to adverse health effects when consumed in excess. Dietary sources of lipids include solid fats and oils in foods, such as meats, fish, poultry, dairy, egg yolks, legumes, nuts, and seeds. Current dietary guidelines suggest that 20% to 35% of calories come from lipids, with the majority form heart-healthy sources, such as fish, legumes, nuts, and seeds.

The micronutrients include vitamins and minerals, which are organic (vitamins) and inorganic (minerals) compounds that are essential to regulating various metabolic processes, such as energy metabolism. Vitamin and mineral deficiencies and insufficiencies can contribute to various health issues. Vitamins may be fat soluble or water soluble. The fat-soluble vitamins include vitamins A, D, E, and K; the water-soluble vitamins consist of vitamin C and a large group of B vitamins. Minerals are compounds that are present in both plant and animal foods, as well as the environment, and are required in the diet to support various health and metabolic processes. Major minerals are present in the body in larger amounts and are also required in larger quantities in the diet as compared to trace minerals.

Water serves many important functions in the human body, including the regulation of body temperature and transport; distribution of nutrients; maintenance of blood volume; lubrication of joints, membranes, and synovial tissue; shock absorption; and removal of waste matter and toxins. Inadequate fluid intake can affect many physiologic functions and cognitive processes. Inadequate hydration prior to, during, and after exercise can impede athletic performance and have various negative effects on the body, such as increased heart rate and body temperature, rate of perceived exertion, use of muscle glycogen, and decreased cardiac output and blood flow.

Nutrition strategies for weight management, both weight gain and loss, focus on a combination of factors, including energy intake, physical activity, sleep, hormones, medications, and genetics. Total energy intake and expenditure remain of primary importance for weight management. Many clients engaging in exercise or sports usually have a weight or performance goal, whether it is fat loss, muscle gain, or improved performance in a sport. The successful accomplishment of these goals relies on an effective training program and appropriate nutrition strategies that complement each other. Fat loss requires a deficit in caloric intake, while minimizing the loss of lean body mass and reduction in TDEE. Some strategies to achieve a net calorie deficit include a moderate reduction in caloric intake and/or an increase in energy expenditure. Building muscle is an anabolic process that requires both the stimulation of MPS and the availability of adequate fuel. Muscle gain strategies include resistance training combined with adequate caloric and protein intake, in the range of 1.6–2.2 g/kg of body weight, with an emphasis on high biological value sources of protein that provide all of the essential amino acids. However, bodybuilders, powerlifters, hard gainers, or athletes seeking to increase fat-free mass to support sports performance may benefit from a caloric surplus in the range of 350 to 500 calories per day to support muscle hypertrophy.

Food labels convey important information on ingredients and nutritional values and can help clients make informed decisions about how a food item contributes to their nutrition and fitness goals. Two particularly important features of a food label are the nutrition facts panel and the ingredients list, which enable clients to evaluate the composition and nutritional value of food products in relation to their goals. Educating clients on ways to use food labels can be an important component of a nutrition strategy for weight and performance goals.