---
section_number: 3
section_title: Basic and Applied Sciences and Nutritional Concepts
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Nutrition
lesson_number: 8
lesson_title: Goal-Based Nutrition Strategies
weight: 15%
objectives:
  - Understanding anatomy, physiology, movement science, metabolism, nutrition, and supplementation.
---

## Content
- Choosing less processed, nutrient-dense foods in place of highly processed and high-calorie items (e.g., a whole apple versus an apple strudel as a snack)

	- Incorporating higher-fiber foods (vegetables, fruits, and whole grains) in place of lower-fiber and calorie-dense foods (e.g., potato chips, French fries)

	- Choosing lean proteins in place of high-fat proteins (e.g., skinless chicken breast versus fried chicken)

	- Replacing high-calorie drinks with water or other calorie-free beverages (seltzer, flavored water, tea, or black coffee)

	- Limiting the frequency and portion of high-calorie foods, such as desserts and pastries

A moderate caloric deficit may also be achieved through overall portion control, eating larger portions of vegetables and lean protein, and limiting portions of higher-calorie processed foods. The USDA My Plate and the United Kingdom’s Eatwell Guide are useful tools for many clients who are unsure of appropriate portion sizes and are seeking a basic guide for reference.

### ENERGY EXPENDITURE

Increasing energy expenditure is another tool for achieving a net calorie deficit for fat loss. As outlined earlier, the components of TDEE include BMR, physical activity, and TEF. Increasing physical activity, through both structured exercise (EAT) and nonexercise activities of daily living (NEAT), can increase TDEE. However, the contribution of EAT may be limited for individuals who participate in structured exercise for a short duration of time. An increase in EAT may also trigger compensatory increases in hunger, which can offset the contribution of EAT to TDEE. Increasing NEAT may be a more effective avenue for increasing TDEE, especially among individuals who have a sedentary lifestyle or those who do not partake in structured exercise routines (Levine et al., 2000). This may mean encouraging clients to engage in more activities outside of a structured gym environment to increase their energy expenditure: standing instead of sitting, walking, taking the stairs, cleaning the house, yardwork, gardening, and so forth. Moderate increases in energy expenditure coupled with a moderate calorie deficit may be more sustainable for clients compared to drastic changes in either or both. Ultimately, adherence to these strategies over a period of time should facilitate sustainable fat loss.

A third strategy, perhaps more useful when other strategies have already been implemented, is to maintain a slightly higher protein intake. As previously noted, maintaining a higher-protein, calorie-controlled diet has a higher TEF than a lower protein or mixed macronutrient diet, which results in lower net caloric intake, due to the higher TEF of lean protein. Protein intake in the range of 2.3–3.4 g/kg per day and higher has been shown to have favorable effects on body composition in several studies (Antonio et al., 2014, 2015). However, protein intake at these levels typically requires supplementation, as it may be difficult for individuals to achieve these amounts with food alone.