---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Anthropometry and Body Composition Measurements
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
Men with a waist circumference greater than or equal to 100 cm (~40 in.) are at higher risk for developing health issues, such as cardiovascular disease or diabetes, while women with a waist circumference greater than or equal to 88 cm (~35 in.) are at higher risk for developing health issues like diabetes and cardiovascular disease (Després, 2012; Howard, 2006; Kawada, 2015). **Table 11-3** illustrates health risks from various waist circumference measurements. It is important for fitness professionals to monitor each client’s waist circumference to identify health risks and track weight loss efforts. However, some clients may feel apprehensive and do not wish to have their waist measured. In these instances, fitness professionals are advised to teach their clients how to measure their own waistlines and report their findings back to the professional.

**TABLE 11-3 Health Risks from Waist Circumference Measurements**

| Risk Category | Women | Men |
|---|---|---|
| Very low | <70 cm (< 27.5 in.) | <80 cm (<31.5 in.) |
| Low | 70–89 cm (27.5–35.0 in.) | 80–99 cm (31.5–38.9 in.) |
| High | 90–109 cm (35.4–42.9 in.) | 100–120 cm (39.3–47.2 in.) |
| Very high | ≥110 cm (≥43.3 in.) | >120 cm (>47.2 in.) |

^Data from Bray (2004).^

### WAIST-TO-HIP RATIO

The **waist-to-hip ratio (WHR)** is another commonly used set of circumference measurements used to assess health risk by defining the shape of the body (i.e., android, gynoid). The hip circumference measures the widest circumference around the hips or buttocks region, above the **gluteal fold**, where the buttocks join the back of the thigh. With both measurements, a ratio can be determined using the formula provided.

WHR = Waist Measurement ÷ Hip Measurement

For the WHR, there are standard scores for men and for women, as shown in **Table 11-4** (Huxley et al., 2010). A high WHR has significant health implications because individuals who are more apple-shaped and carry more fat in the abdominal region are at greater risk for developing cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, such as diabetes.

**TABLE 11-4 WHR Classifications**

| Health Risk | Men | Women |
|---|---|---|
| Low | 0.95 or lower | 0.80 or lower |
| Moderate | 0.96–1.0 | 0.81–0.85 |
| High | 1.0 or higher | 0.86 or higher |

## Key Terms

**Waist-to-hip ratio (WHR)**
The relative score expressing the ratio of the waist circumference to the hip circumference, which correlates to the risk for developing cardiovascular disease.

**Gluteal fold**
The area where the fold of the buttocks joins the back of the thigh.