---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction and Preparticipation Health Screening
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
# Introduction

Structured exercises and physical activities are known to reduce an individual’s risk for **mortality **and **morbidity**, while also providing many physiological, emotional, and cognitive benefits (Department of Health and Human Services, 2018; Warburton & Bredin, 2017). While light-to-moderate intensities of exercise, such as walking or jogging, are generally considered safe for much of the population, higher-intensity activities in certain individuals may hold inherent risk of harm. For example, **high-intensity interval training (HIIT)** is a popular exercise format, but because of the more intense nature of the type of exercise, it might not be suitable at the outset for individuals who are **deconditioned **or those who have health concerns like high blood pressure or cardiovascular disease. Therefore, all new exercisers should be appropriately screened using some form of a **health risk assessment (HRA)** prior to initiating an exercise program to evaluate the benefits versus the risks of starting a program. An HRA is conducted to evaluate the safety of an individual participating in exercise. It differs from a fitness assessment, which measures physical parameters of fitness like aerobic capacity or body composition. Furthermore, fitness assessments can include both subjective and objective measures. Subjective measures reflect what the individual feels, experiences, or reports (e.g., low energy, back discomfort, headaches), whereas objective measures are quantified through the collection of data (blood pressure, heart rate, body fat percentage, etc.). Although both can be viewed as important, the collection of objective data is necessary to determine risk while quantifying any baseline or starting measures.

## Key Terms

**Mortality**
A state or a risk of death or dying.

**Morbidity**
The state of having a disease.

**High-intensity interval training (HIIT)**
An exercise training method defined by intervals of near-maximal intensity broken up by relatively short rest periods.

**Deconditioned**
A state of lost physical fitness, which may include muscle imbalances, decreased flexibility, and a lack of core and joint stability.

**Health risk assessment (HRA)**
A screening tool used to evaluate the benefits and the risks associated with starting any type of exercise that is strenuous in nature.