---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Integrated Training Principles
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Training in a Systematic and Progressive Fashion

When a house is built, construction companies must use a systematic and progressive approach to ensure its solidity and stability, starting with the foundation. The outcome would be vastly different if a house was built directly on the ground versus a concrete slab foundation. For example, the walls and roof may become uneven or unstable, thus reducing the overall integrity of the house.

The same is true for exercise. Like a house, the body must also have a solid foundation of fitness before embarking on an intense training regimen. It is illogical and potentially dangerous for a fitness professional to recommend exercises that are too advanced or physically demanding for their clients. It may also cause frustration and reduce a client’s own **self-efficacy**. Fitness professionals should guide their clients to first build a solid foundation that includes appropriate levels of aerobic and muscular endurance, joint mobility and stability, and core strength. This is best accomplished by using a systematic and progressive approach to program design. If an exercise program is progressive and systematic, using a **progressive overload** approach, the body sufficiently adapts to the new demands placed on it and consequently becomes stronger and more resilient. Conversely, skipping steps may do more harm than good (**Table 13-1**).

**TABLE 13-1 Skipping Steps Versus a Progressive and Systematic Plan**

| Skipping Steps | Progressive and Systematic |
|---|---|
| Possible increased risk of injury
	Potential client frustration because of inability to correctly perform exercises
	Client’s goals may be delayed more than expected or may not be achieved
	Lack of measurement and tracking; unable to track client success
	Inconsistent exercise programming | Decreased risk of injury or overtraining
	Increased client adherence to the exercise program
	Clients more likely to achieve goals
	Ability to track client successes and setbacks
	Consistent exercise programming with progressive overload |

### TRAINING TIP

Goal setting, constant monitoring, and assessing clients at the appropriate times provide feedback to the fitness professional, so that they can adjust and deliver a systematic approach to all exercise sessions. Without completing these tasks, the fitness professional takes the chance of not getting the appropriate feedback, which is critically important for making the necessary changes for the client to experience continuous improvement.

## Key Terms

**Self-efficacy**
One’s belief that they can complete a task, goal, or performance; also known as self-confidence.

**Progressive overload**
Increasing the intensity or volume of exercise programs using a systematic and gradual approach.