---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 13
chapter_title: Integrated Training and the OPT Model
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Integrated Training Principles
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Training Fundamental Movement Patterns

**Fundamental movements patterns** are a necessity for all fitness professionals to demonstrate and teach to their clients. Fitness professionals must ensure their clients’ mastery of these movement patterns to minimize injury risk and increase exercise effectiveness. Most exercises involve at least one of these movement patterns; though more movement patterns exist, and many of these patterns can be combined into a single exercise:

	- Squatting

	- Hip hinge

	- Pulling motions

	- Pushing motions

	- Vertical pressing

Categorizing exercises according to movement patterns is an effective method for assisting fitness professionals when designing exercise programs. Historically, resistance training programs were developed and implemented according to isolated body-part training. This is especially true with regards to bodybuilding and those seeking to alter their body composition. For example, the individual may choose to train their chest and triceps on Monday, back and biceps on Tuesday, legs on Wednesday, and shoulders and arms on Thursday.

While isolated body-part training is still an effective method for increasing muscular **hypertrophy** (Gomes et al., 2019), designing exercise programs based on movement patterns may provide enhanced adaptations when compared to isolated resistance training, such as enhancing neuromuscular coordination and athleticism. A movement pattern exercise design can include many variations. For example, the individual may choose pushing patterns on Monday, pulling patterns on Tuesday, squatting and hip hinging on Wednesdays, and vertical pressing on Thursdays. There are almost limitless possibilities.

### TRY THIS

Not only should a fitness professional incorporate diverse movement patterns into their client’s training program, they should also master these movements for their own benefit. When instructing a client, fitness professionals must be able to explain, demonstrate, correct, and cue the individual. This will reduce worry and confusion for the client and subsequently elevate the fitness professional’s status as a true expert in the field of personal training.

## Training with Optimal Posture

**Posture** is the relative disposition of the body parts in relation to the physical position, such as standing, lying down, and sitting (Kim et al., 2015). Generally speaking, posture is the way the body maintains spinal position in relationship to other body segments. Maintaining ideal posture places the client’s body in the most optimal state to perform movement patterns safely and effectively. However, maintaining ideal posture is a difficult challenge, especially as people age and have developed compensatory movement patterns and faulty static postures (Sobiech et al., 2019).

The aim of the fitness professional is to create progressive and systematic exercise programs that inherently maintain or correct posture to reduce injury risk, enhance the client’s physical health, and allow for a more enjoyable exercise experience. If a systematic and progressive approach is applied, many physical enhancements will occur, such as increased flexibility, endurance, strength, and power. Improving posture is another physical enhancement that occurs when using a systematic approach to program design.

## Key Terms

**Fundamental movement patterns**
Common and essential movements performed in daily life and are involved in exercise motions within a training session.

**Hypertrophy**
Enlargement of an organ or tissue; in the context of fitness, it is often used to describe the enlargement of skeletal muscle.

**Posture**
The relative disposition of the body parts in relation to the physical position, such as standing, lying down, and sitting.