---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Human Movement System Review
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Human Movement System Review

The HMS, also known as the kinetic chain, comprises the muscular, skeletal, and nervous systems. The body’s kinetic chain can be further classified into two regional chains: upper kinetic chain (e.g., shoulder, elbow, and wrist and hand) and lower kinetic chain (e.g., hip, knee, and ankle and foot; Chu et al., 2016). When referring to movement, the fitness professional can classify the body as a complete kinetic chain or the upper and lower kinetic chains. Optimal alignment and function of each component of the HMS is the cornerstone of a sound training program. If one or more segments of the HMS are misaligned and not functioning properly, predictable patterns of dysfunction develop (Cheatham & Kreiswirth, 2014; Sueki et al., 2013). These patterns of dysfunction are referred to as **postural distortion patterns**, which can lead to poor posture, improper movement, and possible injury (**Figure 14-3**) (Page et al., 2010).

Postural distortion patterns (poor static or dynamic posture) are represented by a lack of structural integrity, resulting from decreased functioning of one (or more) components of the HMS (Page et al., 2010; Sueki et al., 2013). A lack of structural integrity can result in **muscle imbalance**, altered **force-couple relationships**, and altered **osteokinematics** and **arthrokinematics** (all discussed in the following section; Neumann, 2017; Sueki et al., 2013). There are several static postural distortions and poor movement patterns that fitness professionals must be aware of and should be identified while conducting assessments with their clients (Page et al., 2010). Refer to Chapter 12 for more information about identifying static postural distortions and altered movement patterns.

## Key Terms

**Postural distortion patterns**
Predictable patterns of muscle imbalances.

**Muscle imbalance**
When muscles on each side of a joint have altered length-tension relationships.

**Force-couple relationships**
The synergistic action of multiple muscles working together to produce movement around a joint.

**Osteokinematic**
Movement of a limb that is visible.

**Arthrokinematics**
The description of joint surface movement; consists of three major types: roll, slide, and spin.

## Images

**Figure 14-3: Postural distortion patterns**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF03.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533