---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Dynamic Stretching and Controversial Stretches
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Dynamic Stretching and Controversial Stretches

**Dynamic stretching** uses the force production of a muscle and the body’s momentum to take a joint through the full available ROM (Behm & Chaouachi, 2011). Dynamic stretching uses the concept of reciprocal inhibition to improve soft tissue extensibility (Kenney et al., 2019). One can perform one set of 10 repetitions using 3 to 10 dynamic stretches (**Table 14-7**). Dynamic stretching is also suggested as a warm-up before athletic activity (Opplert & Babault, 2018). If an individual does possess muscle imbalances, self-myofascial techniques and static stretching should precede dynamic stretching for overactive muscles identified during the assessment process. It is recommended that the client has good levels of tissue extensibility, core stability, and balance capabilities before undertaking an aggressive dynamic stretching program. Detailed explanations of various dynamic stretches are presented in the following section.

**TABLE 14-7 Dynamic Stretching Summary**

| Type of Stretch | Mechanism of Action | Training Variables |
|---|---|---|
| Dynamic stretching | Reciprocal inhibition | 1 set

10–15 repetitions

3–10 exercises |

## HELPFUL HINT

Dynamic stretches are often used in a specific warm-up protocol. These stretches tend to mimic movements used during an exercise session or sport competition. For example, a fitness professional may have a client perform a series of pushups prior to initiating the bench press exercise or hip swings prior to performing squats.

When implementing dynamic stretching, it is important to adequately prepare the client for activity while simultaneously avoiding undue fatigue. The goal is to prepare the body for more intense activity rather than cause breathlessness and exhaustion.

## Key Terms

**Dynamic stretching**
A type of stretching that uses the force production of a muscle and the body’s momentum to take a joint through the full available range of motion.