---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Self-Myofascial Techniques
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Myofascial rolling focuses on the nervous system and **fascial system**, which may produce a mechanical response and a neurophysiological response that influences tissue relaxation and pain in the local and surrounding tissues by activating sensory pathways of the CNS (Grabow et al., 2018; Young et al., 2018).

For the **mechanical effect**, the direct roller compression may relax the local myofascia by increasing local blood flow and reducing myofascial restriction and adhesions (Jay et al., 2014; Kelly & Beardsley, 2016). For the **neurophysiological effect**, the direct roller compression may influence tissue relaxation and pain in the local and surrounding tissues by stimulating local mechanoreceptors and pain receptors. These receptors send inhibitory signals to the CNS, triggering a cascade of tissue relaxation and pain blocking responses that affect the tissues being compressed by the roller (Aboodarda et al., 2015; Young et al., 2018) (**Figure 14-17**).

# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

**Delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)** often occurs 24 to 72 hours after strenuous exercise, particularly movements that involve a lot of eccentric deceleration. DOMS is caused by mild damage to the muscle cells similar to a grade 1 muscle strain. Signs of DOMS may include pain, restricted movement, stiffness, reduced muscle force capacity, and compensation at other joints (Hotfiel et al., 2018). Often, the sore muscle group will send pain signals up to the brain, which are processed and translated into a specific level of pain or discomfort. Researchers postulate that myofascial rolling may provide a pain-blocking effect by stimulating other sensory receptors (e.g., mechanoreceptors), which send their own signals to the brain. These new signals may create a decreased sensation of DOMS by overriding the pain signal sent from the pain receptors involved in the sore muscle (Cheatham et al., 2015; Laffaye et al., 2019).

Self-myofascial rolling is a flexibility technique that focuses on the neural system and fascial system in the body (or the fibrous tissue that surrounds and separates muscle tissue). By applying gentle force to an adhesion, casually referred to as a knot, the elastic muscle fibers are altered from a bundled position (which causes the adhesion) into a straighter alignment with the direction of the muscle or fascia. The gentle pressure from the implement used, such as a foam roller, will stimulate the GTO and create autogenic inhibition, decreasing muscle spindle excitation and releasing the tension of the underlying musculature. In other words, gentle pressure similar to a massage helps to release unwanted muscular tension.

## Key Terms

**Fascial system**
A web of connecting fibers made of connective tissues that are found just under the skin.

**Mechanical effect**
Having a physical effect.

**Neurophysiological effect**
Having an effect on the nervous system.

**Delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)**
Pain or discomfort often felt 24 to 72 hours after intense exercise or unaccustomed physical activity.

## Images

**Figure 14-17: Self-myofascial techniques proposed mechanisms**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF17.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533