---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Dynamic Stretching and Controversial Stretches
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### Jump Rope

#### TECHNIQUE

Many movements can be performed with a jump rope. Choose movements your client can safely perform. It is also important to keep the intensity relatively low to moderate when integrating this exercise into a warm-up routine.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

Flexibility training is a key component to a comprehensive fitness program for clients of all levels. Often, flexibility is implemented in the warm-up or cool-down phase of a client’s workout. Depending on individual needs, a combination of flexibility exercise may provide the best results. Researchers have found that combining static and dynamic stretching reduces the risk for muscle injury and increases flexibility. This combination does not have any detrimental effects on muscle performance, which makes it ideal for a warm-up or cool-down (Behm et al., 2016). Researchers also found that short bouts of self-myofascial rolling increase flexibility, enhance pre-exercise muscle performance, and decrease postexercise soreness and fatigue (Cheatham et al., 2015). The fitness professional should consider a combination of interventions to meet individual client needs. Ideally, self-myofascial rolling and static stretching should be performed prior to active or dynamic stretching to first address restricted ROM (Fairall et al., 2017; Mohr et al., 2014; Škarabot et al., 2015).

## Images

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_UNNUN58A.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_UNNUN58C.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

Alt: Poster
URL: https://cdn-media.nasm.org/NASM/LVP/Videos/nasm_cpt7_el3_flex_jump_rope.jpeg