---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Flexibility Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Human Movement System Review
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Scientific Principles of Flexibility

When a muscle is lengthened, there is a cascade of neurological reactions that occurs that allows the muscle to be stretched. This is called the **lengthening reaction** (Kenney et al., 2019). Also, when the body is moving dynamically, there is a sequencing of muscles that are active and inhibited (i.e., as one muscle contracts, its antagonist muscle relaxes). This sequence is called reciprocal inhibition as discussed previously (Floyd, 2018; Kenney et al., 2019). These physiological reactions are important to understand since they are involved in the different flexibility exercises that are commonly done with clients.

### THE LENGTHENING REACTION

The lengthening reaction is a series of responses that the muscle goes through when being stretched. Often, this reaction is seen when a muscle is stretched and held for a specific amount of time. The steps in the lengthening reaction areas are as follows: (1) The muscle is lengthened (or stretched), and the muscle spindle senses the muscle’s length change; (2) the stretch reflex is activated causing the muscle to contract; (3) as the muscle is held at that position for a prolonged period, the muscle spindle's firing frequency decreases resulting in a relaxation response (Figure 14-11). The lengthening reaction is often seen with **static stretching** because static stretches are typically held long enough to override the muscle spindle.

### RECIPROCAL INHIBITION AND STRETCHING

Reciprocal inhibition is a normal neurological reaction that occurs with human movement, whereas altered reciprocal inhibition occurs when an overactive agonist muscle inhibits the antagonist (Kenney et al., 2019). For stretching, reciprocal inhibition is often involved in different stretches that involve movement, such as active and dynamic stretching. The stretches take advantage of the agonist activation and antagonist inhibition to enhance flexibility, which will be discussed in more detail in the active and dynamic stretching sections later in this chapter.

#### HELPFUL HINT

The fitness professional should recognize that the neuromuscular system has several mechanisms to protect muscles from overstretching and allowing for synchronized muscle contraction among different muscle groups. The stretch reflex can protect the muscle from being overstretched. The lengthening reaction allows our muscles to be lengthened or stretched. Reciprocal inhibition allows our muscles to work in synchronous patterns to perform a desired motion. The different types of stretching, such as static, active, and dynamic stretching, incorporate these reactions.

## Key Terms

**Lengthening reaction**
When a muscle is lengthened, a cascade of neurological reactions occur that allows the muscle to be stretched.

**Static stretching**
A type of stretch where the muscle is passively lengthened to the point of tension and held for a sustained amount of time.

## Images

**Figure 14-11: Lengthening reaction**
Alt: Lengthening reaction.
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH14_FIGF11.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533