---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

Cardiorespiratory fitness is vitally important to health and wellness and is a proven strategy that helps reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and assists with weight management. Cardiores­piratory exercise training programs should be designed with the intent of improving each of the key components of health-related physical fitness (e.g., cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular endurance, flexibility, muscular strength, and body composition). Cardiorespiratory exercise protocols must be individually determined and should follow the FITTE-VP principle.

Adults should accumulate 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., brisk walking) every week or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (i.e., jogging or running) every week, or an equivalent mix of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity.

The purpose of stage training is to ensure that cardiorespiratory training programs progress in an organized fashion to ensure continual adaptation and minimize the risk of overtraining and injury. The five stages of cardiorespiratory training discussed in this chapter use different intensities (training zones). Each training zone targets a specific outcome while remaining customizable for clients.

It is vital to monitor posture with clients who are performing cardiorespiratory activity and to correct postural deviations.

### CHAPTER REVIEW

The benefits of regular physical activity are numerous, including longevity and weight loss. Individuals can achieve numerous health-related benefits from modest amounts of moderate-intensity exercise and even greater benefits from vigorous-intensity exercise, or a combination of both.