---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Components of Cardiorespiratory Fitness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Conditioning Phase 

Individuals who engage in cardiorespiratory exercise likely do so for a variety of reasons, includ­ing expending calories to lose weight, reducing stress, or improving their health, or for a host of other reasons. An important point that fitness professionals should share with their clients is that low-intensity cardiorespiratory exercise will typically result in some improvements in health and well-being but not necessarily result in significant improvements in conditioning as compared with higher-training intensities (Smolander et al., 2000).

In either scenario, cardiorespiratory exercise has a profound effect on physical and mental health as summarized in **Table 15-7** (Agarwal, 2012; Garber et al., 2011; Nystoriak & Bhatnagar, 2018; Warburton et al., 2006).

**TABLE 15-7 Benefits of Cardiorespiratory Exercise**

| Stronger and more efficient heart
	Improved ability to pump blood (enhanced cardiac output)
	Reduced risk of heart disease
	Lower resting heart rate
	Lower heart rate at any given level of work
	Improvement of lung ventilation (more efficient breathing)
	Stronger respiratory muscles
	Thicker cartilage and bones with weight-bearing aerobic exercises
	Improved oxygen transport
	Increase in lean body mass
	Increase in metabolic rate | Reduced cholesterol levels
	Reduced blood pressure
	Improved blood thinning and reduced risk of clot formation
	Improved fuel supply (improved ability to use fatty acids, sparing muscle glycogen stores)
	Improved ability of muscles to use oxygen
	Improved mental alertness
	Reduced tendency for depression and anxiety
	Improved ability to relax and sleep
	Improved tolerance to stress
	Reduced risk of obesity or diabetes mellitus |
|---|---|

## Cool-Down Phase

A cool-down provides the body with a smooth transition from exercise back to a steady state of rest. In essence, a cool-down is the opposite of the warm-up. This portion of a workout is often overlooked and viewed as less important than the other components. However, proper use of a cool-down can have a significant impact on a client’s overall response to exercise. The overarching goal of a cool-down is to reduce heart and breathing rates, gradually cool body temperature, return muscles to their optimal resting lengths, prevent pooling of blood in the lower extremities (which may cause dizziness or possible fainting), and restore physiologic systems close to baseline. Sufficient time for a cardiorespiratory cool-down period is approximately 5 to 10 minutes. The proposed benefits of a cool-down are shown in **Table 15-8** (Hooren & Peake, 2018; Koyama et al., 2000).

**TABLE 15-8 Benefits of Cool-Down**

| Reduce heart and breathing rates
	Gradually cool body temperature
	Return muscles to their optimal resting lengths
	Prevent pooling of blood in the lower extremities
	Restore physiologic systems close to baseline |
|---|