---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Postural Considerations in Cardiorespiratory Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
# Postural Considerations in Cardiorespiratory Training

When prescribing cardiorespiratory training, it is important to continuously assess the client’s posture during movement. Whether the client is exhibiting poor posture while standing or in motion, it is the fitness professional’s responsibility to correct postural alignment to minimize injury risk and maximize performance. Common postural deviations that clients may exhibit while engaging in cardiorespiratory training include the following:

	- Forward head and rounded shoulders

	- Anterior pelvic tilt

	- Adducted and internally rotated knees and pronated feet

To ensure movement quality during cardiorespiratory training, use the following observa­tion techniques for clients who exhibit these postural deviations.

## Rounded Shoulders and Forward Head Posture

Rounded shoulders and a forward head posture may negatively affect **ventilation **and oxygen delivery to muscle cells and, subsequently, performance. The forward rounding of the shoulders theoretically limits the ability to lift the ribcage during ventilation and forcefully contract the diaphragm during **inspiration**. For clients exhibiting symptoms from this posture during cardiorespiratory exercise, the fitness professional must closely observe for the following postural deviations:

	- During use of stationary bicycles, treadmills, and elliptical trainers, watch closely for rounding of shoulders forward and a protruding head and cue the client to retract their shoulders and head.

	- On steppers and treadmills, watch for the grasping of the handles (with an oversupinated or overpronated hand position), which may cause elevated and protracted shoulders and a forward head. If possible, this equipment should be used without the assistance of the hands to increase the demands on the core musculature, elevating the caloric expenditure and balance requirements of the exercise.

	- In settings in which a television is present, watch for excessive cervical extension (looking upward) or rotation of the head to view the television.

## Anterior Pelvic Tilt

An anterior pelvic tilt (arched lower back) may also negatively affect ventilation, oxygen delivery to muscle cells, and performance similar to clients exhibiting upper crossed syndrome. Moreover, an anteriorly rotated pelvis and arched lower back may also result in low-back pain, which can negatively impact exercise performance (Key, 2010). The fitness professional must closely observe the client for the following postural deviations:

	- Initial use of bicycles or steppers may not be warranted, or should be minimized, because the hips are placed in a constant state of flexion, adding to what may already be an overactive hip flexor complex for many clients. If they are used, emphasize flexibility techniques for the hip flexors before and after use. Additional strengthening exercises for the core and gluteal complex are also recommended.

## Key Terms

**Ventilation**
Process by which oxygen is transferred to the muscles from the lungs.

**Inspiration**
The process of contracting the inspiratory muscles to move air into the body.