---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 4
lesson_title: Introduction to Stage Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
### STAGE 4 

Stage 4 is for the advanced client who has obtained a high-level cardiorespiratory fitness. Stage 4 training increases the capacity of the anaerobic energy system and is applicable for high-level athletes and fitness enthusiasts seeking improvements in anaerobic capacity and power.

Stage 4 is not appropriate for all clients, especially those with only modest levels of physical fitness or those averse to high-intensity conditioning. Consequently, stage 4 should be reserved for those seeking improvement in maximal anaerobic performance, such as athletes and top-end fitness competitors. Like stage 3, measurements of VT1 and VT2 need to be recorded to accu­rately program stage 4 intervals.

A stage 4 workout includes the client moving in and out of all four training zones. A general rule of thumb is to have most of the time spent in zone 1, with brief interval periods in zones 2, 3, and 4 to minimize overtraining while simultaneously providing enough overload to challenge the anaerobic energy system. Furthermore, brief intervals in zones 2, 3, and 4 ensure the client is working at maximum performance rather than maximal effort.

Intervals should be client specific based on the client’s goals, needs, and abilities. The volume of training in stage 4 should be slow and gradual. If the client exhibits signs of overtraining, such as disturbed sleep, excessive fatigue, impaired performance, loss of appetite, or mood swings, volume and intensity of stage 4 workouts should be decreased, and the client should be allowed more recovery time between exercise sessions.

##### HELPFUL HINT

Maximal performance refers to performing a task where a client or athlete is performing at their absolute peak ability, and work intensity is consistent across all intervals. For example, an athlete runs a 100-meter dash in an attempt to beat their best time. The athlete then sufficiently rests to restore their energy stores (ATP) before attempting another 100-meter dash. The athlete’s goal is decreasing their time in the 100-meter dash, which is a performance initiative.

Maximal effort refers to executing a task where effort is 100% but performance may dwindle due to fatigue. For example, an athlete runs repeated 100-meter dashes with only 30 seconds of rest between each attempt. Consequently, the athlete’s 100-meter times slow with each attempt even though the athlete is giving 100% effort. This format improves conditioning but may not be ideal for improving sprinting performance.

#### EXAMPLE STAGE 4 CARDIORESPIRATORY PROGRAM 

Stage 4 exercise programs involve high-intensity exercise and should be client specific. Following is one example of implementing a stage 4 workout (**Figure 15-5**):

	- Warm up in zone 1 for up to 5–10 minutes.

	- Then, increase the workload every 60 seconds until reaching zone 4. This will require a climb through zones 2 and 3, which may take a couple of minutes.

	- Push for 10 seconds in zone 4 and then decrease the workload back to zone 1. This 1-minute break is an important minute to help gauge training status and improvement.

	- As improvements are made during several weeks of training, the client’s heart rate will drop more quickly. The faster the client’s heart rate drops, the more fit they are becoming.

	- If the client is not able to drop to the appropriate heart rate during the 1-minute break, assume that they are tired and about to overtrain. The solution is to stay in zone 1 for the remainder of the workout. The bottom line is that the client is not rested enough to do that type of exercise on that day (which may be because of a hard workout the day before, not enough sleep, or poor nutrition).

	- If the client’s heart rate does drop to a normal rate, then overload the body again by performing another zone 4 interval.

	- After this minute, go back to zone 1 for 5–10 minutes and repeat if desired.

## Images

**Figure 15-5: Example stage 4 workout**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH15_FIGF05.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533