---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 15
chapter_title: Cardiorespiratory Training Concepts
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
According to the most current public health guidelines, moderate-intensity exercise (i.e., brisk walking) should be performed 150 minutes per week, whereas vigorous-intensity exercise (e.g., jogging or running) should be performed 75 minutes per week, or a combination of moderate-intensity and vigorous-intensity is also acceptable.

All exercise training recommendations, including cardiorespiratory exercise, must be individually determined and should use the FITTE-VP principle. FITTE-VP stands for frequency, intensity, type, time, enjoyment, volume, and progression.

Different cardiorespiratory training programs place different demands on the cardiorespiratory and muscular systems and ultimately affect a client’s adaptations and goals. Stage training is a five-stage programming system that uses different training zones to elicit specific physiologic adaptions. Stage 1 consists of an intensity below VT1 and is intended for beginners and is also used as a recovery zone for more advanced clients. Stage 2 is designed for clients with moderate cardiorespiratory fitness levels who are ready and desire to begin training at a higher intensity. A stage 2 interval training workout consists of a mix of recovery intervals just below VT1 and work intervals performed at an intensity just above VT1. A stage 2 workout can also be performed using steady-state exercise just above VT1. A stage 3 workout includes the client moving in and out of training zones 1, 2, and 3. Stage 4 involves performing intervals that involve all four training zones. Stage 5 consists of sport-specific training and is applicable for all types of athletes.

Because movement is involved, it is vital to monitor posture with clients who are performing cardiorespiratory activity. Common postural deviations include rounded shoulders and forward head, an anterior pelvic tilt, and adducted and internally rotated knees and pronated feet.

### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Cardiorespiratory fitness reflects the ability of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems to supply oxygen-rich blood to skeletal muscles during sustained physical activity.

	- Cardiorespiratory fitness is one of five components to health-related physical fitness; the others include muscular strength, muscular endurance, flexibility, and body composition.

	- Research has confirmed that an individual’s cardiorespiratory fitness level is a strong predictor of morbidity and mortality.

	- Research demonstrates that cardiorespiratory exercise and physical activity provide many benefits that enhance health, longevity, and weight loss.

	- Cardiorespiratory exercise must be individually determined and should use the FITTE-VP principle. FITTE-VP stands for frequency, intensity, type, time, enjoyment, volume, and progression.

	- Frequency refers to the number of training sessions in a given time period, usually expressed as per week.

	- Moderate-intensity exercise (e.g., brisk walking) should be performed at least five times per week, whereas vigorous-intensity exercise (e.g., jogging or running) should be performed at least three times per week, or a combination of moderate-intensity and vigorous-intensity is also acceptable.

	- Intensity refers to the level of demand that a given activity places on the body.

	- Some methods for monitoring cardiorespiratory exercise intensity include calculating VO~2max~, using percentages of maximal heart rate (HR~max~), heart rate reserve (HRR), metabolic equivalents (METs), ratings of perceived exertion (RPE), and using the talk test.

	- Time refers to the length of time engaged in an activity or exercise training session and is typically expressed in minutes.