---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 16
chapter_title: Core Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Core Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
**TABLE 16-1 Examples of Local and Global Core Muscles (continued)**

| Examples of Global Muscles | Primary Actions | Image |
|---|---|---|
| Iliopsoas (iliacus + psoas) | Hip flexion (in addition to hip adduction and external rotation) |  |
|  |

### LOCAL MUSCLES

Local muscles generally attach on or near the vertebrae and often have short attachments ranging between one and two vertebrae segments. Local muscles provide dynamic control of the spinal segments that limit excessive compression, shear, and rotational forces between spinal segments. This is important for stabilizing the vertebrae and limiting strain on passive stabilizing structures, including intervertebral discs and ligaments. Local muscles consist primarily of **type I (slow twitch) muscle fibers** (Dickx et al., 2010), which have a high density of muscle spindles and are important for assisting in proprioception of the spine (Boyd-Clark et al., 2002). Therefore, the appropriate function of local core muscles is important for maintaining proper posture of the vertebral column during strengthening exercises and other dynamic movements.

#### CRITICAL

Developing movement strategies that effectively stabilize the spine by activating local muscles, prior to the initiation of extremity movements, is important for minimizing improper loading of the spine and reducing the risk of injury. These strategies are discussed later in the chapter.

Additionally, appropriate posture throughout the spine is important for ensuring proper extremity movements, thereby enhancing the performance of the entire neuromuscular system. It is important to remember that dysfunction of local core musculature can be present in individuals with strong global core musculature. Therefore, exercises that activate, strengthen, and build endurance in local core muscles should still be incorporated into all core training programs.

## Key Terms

**Type I (slow twitch) muscle fibers**
Muscle fibers that are small in size, generate lower amounts of force, and are more resistant to fatigue.

## Images

**TABLE 16-1: Examples of Local and Global Core Muscles (continued)Examples of Global Muscles**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH16_TABT01_11A.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**TABLE 16-1: Examples of Local and Global Core Muscles (continued)Examples of Global Muscles**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH16_TABT01_11B.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533