---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 16
chapter_title: Core Training Concepts
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Guidelines for Core Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
Core training programs must be designed to achieve the following functional outcomes. The sequence is critical for optimizing function:

	- Intervertebral stability (stabilization of individual spinal segments)

	- Lumbopelvic stability (stabilization of lumbo-pelvic-hip complex)

	- Movement efficiency (improved movement quality and force output)

### CORE TRAINING PROGRESSIONS

When initiating a core training program, exercises should initially focus on stabilization through the spine and pelvis without gross movement of the trunk. These exercises are designed to improve neuromuscular efficiency and intervertebral stability, focusing on drawing-in and then bracing during the exercises (Selkow et al., 2017). These exercises primarily target the local core muscles discussed earlier in the chapter. Sample exercises that follow this protocol include (but are not limited to) the following:

	- Marching

	- Floor bridge

	- Ball bridge

	- Floor cobra

	- Ball cobra

	- Fire hydrant

	- Plank

	- Side plank

	- Dead bug

	- Bird dog

	- Pallof press

	- Farmer’s carry

The next progression is to involve more dynamic eccentric and concentric movements of the spine throughout a full range of motion. In other words, these exercises involve flexion, extension, and rotation of the trunk. It is always important for the fitness professional to communicate with a client’s healthcare provider to determine if there are any underlying medical conditions that may warrant avoiding certain exercises. In this progression, specificity, speed, and neural demands are also increased using moderate to fast repetition tempos. These exercises are designed to improve lumbopelvic stability, concentric strength (force production), eccentric strength (force reduction), and neuromuscular efficiency (coordination) of the core. Sample exercises that follow this protocol include (but are not limited to) the following:

	- Floor crunch

	- Ball crunch

	- Back extension

	- Reverse crunch

	- Knee-up

	- Cable rotation

	- Cable lift

	- Cable chop