---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 17
chapter_title: Balance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: Scientific Rationale for Balance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
High school athletes with chronic ankle instability who completed a 4-week balance training program during rehabilitation using a biomechanical ankle platform system board significantly improved both static and dynamic single-limb balance compared to those who did not do balance training as a part of their rehabilitation (Cain et al., 2017). Using either a traditional single-limb balance program (single-limb stance, single-limb stance with ball toss and kicking, step-down with single-limb stance) or a progressive hop-to-stabilization balance program (various single-limb hop-to-stabilization exercises) improved self-reported function, semi-dynamic balance, and joint position sense in athletes with chronic ankle instability (Anguish & Sandrey, 2018).

Deficits in balance ability may persist for an extended period following an injury. A recent study found that individuals following an ACL reconstruction demonstrated worse semi-dynamic balance on both injured and uninjured limbs as far as 1 year postsurgery compared to healthy controls (Hatton et al., 2017). Therefore, athletes with a prior knee injury will benefit from balance training programs for both limbs when working with a Certified Personal Trainer.

Additionally, balance training is important to enhance rehabilitation of individuals at risk for a fall or after a fall. A recent study by Gerards et al. (2017) found that using perturbation-based balance training in a safe and controlled environment significantly reduced the incidence of falls in older adults. A **perturbation** is a mechanism where a postural disturbance is added to a task (i.e., lightly pushing on a client’s shoulders as they are balancing), which causes the client to learn to maintain or recover balance. **Table 17-3** summarizes how balance training impacts rehabilitation efforts.

**TABLE 17-3 Balance Training for Rehabilitation**

| Improves performance during single-limb activities
	 Improves proprioception and self-reported function in athletes with ankle instability
	Enhances rehabilitation outcomes for both limbs in athletes who suffer an ACL injury and surgery on one limb
	Enhances rehabilitation outcomes that focus on decreasing the risk of falls in older adults |
|---|

### CRITICAL

Certified Personal Trainers are not qualified to diagnose an injury or perform medical rehabilitation, as it is beyond their scope of practice. However, once the client has been cleared by a medical professional (i.e., physician, physical therapist), fitness professionals play an important role in helping balance-impaired individuals regain and continue to improve functionality, whether for simple activities of daily living or high-level sports. Consistent, clear communication between medical and fitness professionals is critical to ensure safety for the client and optimize the exercise program to help the client achieve personal goals.

## Importance of Properly Training the Balance System

An effective balance training program should challenge the threshold of an individual’s limit of stability. This threshold must be stressed in a multiplanar, **proprioceptively enriched environment**, using functional movement patterns to improve static, semi-dynamic, and dynamic balance.

## Key Terms

**Perturbation**
An alteration of the body’s current state caused by the application of an external force.

**Proprioceptively enriched environment**
An unstable (yet controllable) exercise environment that causes the body to use its internal balance and stabilization mechanisms.