---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 19
chapter_title: Speed, Agility, and Quickness Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Concepts in Speed, Agility, and Quickness Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
**TABLE 19-1 Kinetic Chain Checkpoints During Running Movements (continued)**

| Body Position | Comments |
|---|---|
| Lumbo-pelvic-hip complex (LPHC) | The body should have a slight forward torso lean during acceleration. |
| During maximal velocity, the LPHC should be fairly neutral, without excessive extension or flexion, unless to reach for an object. |
| Head | The head should remain in line with the LPHC, and the LPHC should be in line with the legs. |
| The head should not compensate and jut excessively forward, unless necessary to track an object (such as a ball), as this can affect the position of the LPHC (known as the pelvo-ocular reflex). |

## Agility

Agility necessitates the ability to start (or accelerate), stop (or decelerate and stabilize), and change direction while maintaining postural control (Hojka et al., 2016; Lockie et al., 2019). Agility requires high levels of coordination to be able to maintain one’s center of gravity over their base of support while changing directions at various speeds. Agility training can enhance deceleration capabilities, dynamic flexibility, postural control, core strength, and **proprioception** (Trecroci et al., 2016). Proper agility training can also help reduce the risk of injury by enhancing the body’s ability to effectively control eccentric (deceleration) forces in all planes of motion as well as by improving the structural integrity of connective tissue (e.g., tendons and ligaments) during uncontrolled and reactive situations. Proper technique for agility drills should follow the guidelines in **Table 19-1**.

## Quickness

Quickness is the ability to react and change body position with maximal rate of force production, in all planes of motion and from all body positions, during dynamic activities. Quickness involves the ability to assess visual, auditory, or kinesthetic stimuli and to provide the appropriate physical response as fast as possible (such as hitting a baseball, returning a tennis serve, or swerving to avoid a car accident).

### HELPFUL HINT

Agility often requires an individual or athlete to react to a stimulus and respond accordingly, such as a basketball player running in various directions to avoid a defender.

Quickness also requires an individual to react to a stimulus; however, the response does not require ambulation (e.g., running or sprinting). An example of this would be a hockey goalkeeper defending against a penalty shot.

## Key Terms

**Proprioception**
The body’s ability to naturally sense its general orientation and relative position of its parts.