---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Guidelines for Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
#### CRITICAL

Stabilization-focused resistance exercises should use a slow repetition tempo, a high amount of repetitions (typically 12–20), and a few sets (1–3). This form of training enhances muscular endurance, posture, and joint stability.

However, exercises must be tailored to the client’s own ability level. For example, a highly skilled athlete may be able to perform advanced forms of stability training, such as performing lifts on a single leg, or use unique loading schemes seen with implements like an Earthquake Bar or kettlebell.

Conversely, an older adult unaccustomed to exercise will likely need to start with less advanced forms of stability training. In this instance, the use of elastic bands in a seated position may be the most unstable position that this client can safely handle. Over time, with practice and improved conditioning, the older adult can graduate toward more advanced forms of stability training.

### STRENGTH-FOCUSED EXERCISES

After clients have obtained sufficient movement competency, stability, and muscular endurance, it is safe to progress toward strength-focused resistance exercises. These exercises focus on the adaptations of strength and muscular hypertrophy and typically require heavier loads than stabilization-focused resistance exercises. The goal is to increase the amount of stress placed on the body for increased muscle size and strength. This period of training is a necessary progression from stabilization for anyone who desires to increase muscle size, muscle strength, and bone mineral density. Common exercises in this category include squats, Romanian deadlifts, bench presses, and other common weightlifting exercises (**Figure 20-13**).

## Images

**Figure 20-13: Strength-focused resistance exercises**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH20_FIG13.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533