---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Safety
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
## Proper Breathing Technique

Although breathing is regulated and coordinated by the autonomic nervous system, proper breathing is not automatic. Breathing influences muscular function and  posture  because the habitual use of breathing muscles during respiration affects the ways in which these muscles are used (Courtney, 2009).

Especially during resistance training, fitness professionals need to teach their clients proper breathing techniques to maximize performance and minimize injury risk. During the concentric phase of an exercise, the client should breathe out (exhalation), preferably through the mouth, whereas during the eccentric portion of the lift, the client should breathe in (inhalation).

When discussing breathing technique, the **Valsalva maneuver** can be a useful strategy, particularly when performing maximal or near-maximal lifts to ensure spinal stability (Hackett & Chow, 2013). This process involves expiring against a closed glottis, creating additional intra-abdominal pressure and spinal stability. In turn, this reduces the associative compressive forces on the spinal discs during lifting. Keeping the spine stable requires individuals to brace the trunk, using many abdominal muscles, including the transverse abdominis, rectus abdominis, the external and internal obliques, and the diaphragm, thus generating large amounts of intra-abdominal pressure, which is critically important when lifting heavy loads (Kroell & Mike, 2017).

However, the Valsalva maneuver is also potentially dangerous because it can cause lightheadedness and dizziness, impede the return of venous blood to the heart, and raise an individual’s heart rate and blood pressure. Using the Valsalva maneuver is generally not recommended for clients presenting with hypertension and other forms of heart disease (Looga, 2005). Considering that a large majority of fitness clients are seeking weight loss and improved health measures as opposed to maximal strength, the use of the Valsalva maneuver in many cases is not necessary, unless the client is physically healthy and seeking maximal performance measures in strength.

## Key Terms

**Valsalva maneuver**
A process that involves expiring against a closed windpipe, creating additional intra-abdominal pressure and spinal stability.