---
section_number: 5
section_title: Exercise Technique and Training Instruction
chapter: 20
chapter_title: Resistance Training Concepts
lesson_number: 1
lesson_title: Introduction to Resistance Training
weight: 24%
objectives:
  - Instructing and demonstrating proper exercise techniques.
---

## Content
In the previous example of unaccustomed exercise, once DOMS has decreased from the initial training session, subsequent soreness is reduced, thereby enhancing repair and regeneration of muscle tissue, resulting in the advancement of performance. Performance will continue to improve until some new performance plateau is reached and will be maintained if training is maintained.

### EXHAUSTION STAGE

Prolonged stress or intolerable amounts of stress can lead to **exhaustion** or distress. This can result in several negative consequences such as the following:

	- Stress fractures

	- Muscle strains and ligament sprains

	- Joint pain

	- Emotional fatigue (Cunanan et al., 2018)

Although many of these types of injuries can develop independently, they can also lead to a combination of accumulated injury. **Table 20-2** provides a review of GAS.

**TABLE 20-2 General Adaptation Syndrome**

| Stage | Reaction |
|---|---|
| Alarm reaction | An initial reaction to stressor, such as fatigue, joint stiffness, or DOMS |
| Resistance development | Increased functional capacity to adapt to a stressor, such as increasing recruitment of muscle fibers |
| Exhaustion | A prolonged intolerable stressor that produces fatigue and leads to injury or a breakdown in the system |

Resistance training, in addition to other forms of exercise, must be cycled through different stages that increase stress placed on the body but also allow for sufficient repair and regeneration to avoid the exhaustion stage. Periodization is described as macromanagement, or planned manipulation of training variables in an organized fashion to improve performance over time (Evans, 2019). In other words, periodization is a training program that is divided into smaller, progressive stages (i.e., training cycles). There is large variability between the lengths of each training cycle because clients have unique physical abilities, goals, and training schedules.

#### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

*Overtraining* syndrome is a condition in which an athlete or fitness client experiences fatigue, declining performance, and burnout. This is a chronic condition and occurs primarily because of overly aggressive training schedules; more particularly, it is a sequence of training bouts that is abruptly increased, exists for an extended period, or entails high-volume or high-intensity exercise with inadequate recovery and regeneration (Meeusen et al., 2006, 2013).

*Overreaching* is more of a temporary condition when compared to overtraining syndrome. Like overtraining syndrome, overreaching also involves decrements in performance, often as a result of fatigue (Meeusen et al., 2006, 2013). If overreaching is not identified, it can lead to overtraining syndrome. While these terms may sound the same, the subtle difference has to do with the amount of time for performance restoration, not the type of duration of training stress.

## Key Terms

**Exhaustion**
Prolonged stress or stress that is intolerable and will produce exhaustion or distress to the system.