---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Power
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
#### TRAINING TIP

Plyometric exercises used in Phase 5 are performed as fast and as explosively as possible. Some example exercises using this protocol include (but are not limited to) ice skaters, single-leg power step-ups, proprioceptive plyometrics, and depth jumps.

Because of their importance, fitness professionals can choose to program SAQ exercises on nonresistance training days. Choose between six and ten SAQ exercises with a repetition range of three to five for three to five sets.

### POWER LEVEL RESISTANCE TRAINING

The power training phase focuses on both high force and velocity to increase power. This is accomplished by supersetting a strength-focused exercise with a power-focused exercise for each body part (such as performing a heavy barbell bench press superset with an explosive medicine ball chest pass). This form of training is also known as *complex training* and *contrast training*.

The range of training intensities is important to stimulate different physiologic changes. The first exercise uses a heavy load, one to five RM, which is approximately 85% to 100% of a client’s 1RM. In other words, the first exercise in the superset is a heavy lift that challenges the body to generate high amounts of force. These exercises and loads increase power by increasing the *force *side of the power equation (force × velocity).

The second exercise in the superset focuses on the development of speed and velocity by using explosive movements with light loads. Implements, such as medicine balls, tubing, and weight vests, are common when performing these exercises. However, body weight is also common for many power-based plyometric drills. Light loads (30% to 45% intensity or 8 to 10 RM) at high speeds are appropriate intensities. However, when using a medicine ball, opt for a weighted ball that is no more than 10% of a client’s body weight. These exercises affect the *velocity *side of the power equation (force × velocity).

By supersetting strength and power-based exercises, power outputs can be enhanced (Cormier et al., 2020; Freitas et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019; Santos & Janeira, 2008). Because the goal of this phase of training is primarily power, the fitness professional will want to progress by increasing the number of sets, intensity (load), and velocity of movement.

### POWER LEVEL CLIENT'S CHOICE

Identical to earlier phases of the OPT model, clients can pick their own exercises in this section of the workout. All types of exercises are permitted in this section as long as they are deemed safe and fit within the capabilities of the client.

### POWER LEVEL COOL-DOWN

As mentioned previously, the cool-down portion is identical in all five phases of the OPT model. It should last between 5 and 10 minutes and include a mixture of the following exercises in order: cardiorespiratory exercise (optional), self-myofascial techniques, and static stretching.