---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Applying the OPT Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
In addition, cardiorespiratory training will be used in conjunction with the OPT model to help weight-loss clients expend additional calories and improve health and overall fitness. Cardiorespiratory training should be performed each month and can be done on the workout days (or any other day during the week, depending on the client’s schedule).

**Figure 21-1: 4** illustrates the monthly plan for January. This plan demonstrates a 3-day-per-week workout plan, with scheduled workouts on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. However, this monthly plan can easily be performed twice or four or more times per week depending on the client’s schedule and commitment to exercise.

**Figure 21-14Fat loss monthly plan: January

**Figure 21-1: 5** illustrates the monthly plan for July, the start of undulating periodization, in which the client performs the first three phases of the OPT model simultaneously. As with the previous months, this plan demonstrates a 3-day-per-week workout plan with scheduled workouts on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. Cardiorespiratory exercise can be done on the workout days (or any other day during the week depending on the client’s schedule).

**Figure 21-15Fat loss monthly plan: July

## Images

**Figure 21-14: Fat loss monthly plan: January**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20CH21_fig21.14_fat-loss-monthly.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 21-15: Fat loss monthly plan: July**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/RESIZED%20-%20CH21_fig21.15_fat-loss-monthly-2.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533