---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# SUMMARY

Designing exercise programs for clients can be a complicated process because there are many variables to consider, such as the client’s goals, their physical abilities and fitness level, and medical history. In addition, exercise programs need individuality and uniqueness to increase commitment and adherence to the program. Consequently, it is vital that fitness professionals design exercise programs that are based on the client’s goals, needs, and abilities. Moreover, the fitness professional should adopt an integrated, multicomponent approach to program design that includes flexibility, cardiorespiratory, core, balance, plyometric, SAQ, and resistance training. This is the basis for NASM’s OPT model.

The OPT model consists of three levels (stabilization, strength, and power) subdivided into five phases. The OPT model is an evidence-based model, meaning it has been both tested in a laboratory setting and successfully implemented with real-life clients and athletes to achieve their health, fitness, and performance goals. It was developed to concurrently improve flexibility, endurance, core and joint stabilization, hypertrophy, strength, and power. In addition, the OPT model is extremely useful for helping clients reduce their body fat, increase lean muscle mass, and improve athletic performance.