---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 2
lesson_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# The Optimum Performance  Training Model

The National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM) designed the OPT model as a planned, systematic, and periodized training program (**Figure 21: -6**). The OPT model was developed to simultaneously improve all physical abilities, such as flexibility, muscular and aerobic endurance, core stabilization, balance, muscular strength, coordination, and power. In addition, the OPT model is extremely successful in helping clients and athletes from diverse populations reduce their body fat, increase lean muscle mass, and improve athletic performance and overall health. It is an evidence-based model, meaning it has been tested and validated both in a laboratory setting and with real-life clients and athletes (DiStefano et al., 2013).

The different periods of training seen in a traditional periodized exercise model include a preparatory (introductory) period, a hypertrophy period, a maximal strength period, and a power period. The OPT model simplifies these periods into three distinct levels: stabilization, strength, and power. However, the OPT model takes exercise programming one step further, in which the three levels are subdivided into five unique phases of training (**Table 21-3**on the following page).

The OPT model should be thought of as a staircase, guiding clients through different levels of physical adaptation. This journey will involve going up and down the stairs, stopping at different steps, and moving to various heights, depending on the client’s goals, needs, and abilities.

## Images

**Figure 21-6: The OPT model**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH21_FIGF06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533