---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Fitness professionals must be able to apply the OPT model in multiple situations and with a variety of clients. For example, the OPT model can be used to reduce body fat, increase lean body mass, and improve general sports performance.

To reduce body fat, clients must expend more calories than they consume. Because the goal does not include maximal strength or power, the client only needs to be cycled through the first three phases of the OPT model. Cardiorespiratory training should be performed each month to improve cardiorespiratory system efficiency and increase caloric expenditure.

To increase lean body mass, clients must work with higher volumes to increase muscle size. Clients will begin in Phase 1 to ensure proper muscle balance and endurance of the stabilization muscles. The remainder of the annual plan shows the client cycling through Phase 2 (greater strength endurance and more volume), Phase 3 (larger volumes of stress for hypertrophy), and Phase 4 (increased strength capacity and more hypertrophy). Cardiorespiratory training can be performed each month to ensure the cardiorespiratory system is efficient and promoting optimal tissue recoverability.

To improve general performance, clients must increase overall proprioception, strength, and rate of force production. The training can use the entire OPT model; although for the typical client, Phases 1, 2, and 5 will be the most important. The client will begin in Phase 1 to ensure proper muscle balance and endurance of the stabilization muscles before progressing to Phase 2. The remainder of the annual plan shows the client cycling through Phases 1, 2, and 5 using an undulating periodization scheme. Cardiorespiratory training can be performed each month as well.

### 

On screen audio. 

#### CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS

	- Exercise programs need individuality, based on the client’s assessment results, to make them impactful for clients, which likely increases adherence to the program.

	- Fitness professionals should adopt an integrated, multicomponent approach to program design that includes flexibility, cardiorespiratory, core, balance, plyometric, SAQ, and resistance training.

	- Exercise programs must consider many variables, such as teaching proper movement patterns, improving mobility and stability, enhancing endurance, and reducing the likelihood of injury.

	- A training plan determines the forms of training to be used, how long it will take, how often it will change, and what specific exercises will be performed.

	- Periodization is a systematic approach to program design that varies the amount and type of stress placed on the body to produce a physical adaptation and reduce the likelihood of overtraining and injury.

	- An annual training plan, or macrocycle, demonstrates the long-term training program and how it progresses each month.

	- A monthly training plan, or mesocycle, typically outlines a training plan for 1 month.

	- A weekly plan, or microcycle, describes the specific workouts for the week.

	- Linear periodization gradually increases the intensity of the training program while simultaneously decreasing volume over a specific period of time.

	- Undulating periodization uses changes in volume, intensity, and exercise selection to provide loading differences on a daily or weekly basis.