---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 21
chapter_title: The Optimum Performance Training Model
lesson_number: 7
lesson_title: Summary
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
### CHAPTER REVIEW

Planned fitness training (or periodization) shifts the focus of a training program at regularly planned intervals of time to vary stress placed on the body to produce adaptation and prevent injury. A training plan clarifies what forms of training will be used, how long it will take, how often it will change, and what specific exercises will be performed. An annual plan (or macro cycle) organizes the training program for a 1-year period. The annual plan is further broken down into periods of training called monthly plans (or mesocycles), which detail the specific training plan for each month. Weekly plans (or microcycles) are the specific workouts that the client will do for that week. Training plans can involve linear periodization, which gradually increase the intensity of the training load while simultaneously decreasing volume over a set period of time, or undulating periodization, which uses changes in volume, intensity, and exercise selection to provide loading differences on a daily or weekly basis.

The OPT model is a planned fitness training system that can be used to create programs for clients with various goals and abilities. It uses a specific workout template to organize daily exercise routines. The workout template is divided into six parts: Warm-Up, Activation, Skill Development, Resistance Training, Client’s Choice, and Cool-Down.

The different levels of training seen in a traditional periodization model include anatomical adaptation, hypertrophy, maximal strength, and power. In the OPT model, these are simplified into stabilization, strength, and power. These levels are further subdivided into five different phases of training: Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training, Phase 2 Strength Endurance Training, Phase 3 Muscular Development Training, Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training, and Phase 5 Power Training.

The first level, stabilization, is crucial for all beginners as it is designed to prepare the body for the demands of higher levels of training. For advanced clients, this level allows for active recovery from more intense bouts of training. It involves lower-intensity, higher-repetition training, emphasizing the improvement of movement patterns, core and joint stabilization, muscular endurance, and joint mobility. Once a client displays adequate movement competency, exercises in the stabilization level progressively challenge proprioception and postural control. The stabilization level consists of one phase of training: Phase 1 Stabilization Endurance Training.

The second level, strength, is designed to increase strength endurance, muscle size, and maximal strength. The strength level of the OPT model consists of three phases: Phase 2 Strength Endurance Training, Phase 3 Muscular Development Training, and Phase 4 Maximal Strength Training. Phase 2 entails the use of superset techniques in which a more strength-focused exercise is immediately followed with a stabilization-focused exercise with similar biomechanical motions. Phase 3 stresses maximal hypertrophy, focusing on high levels of volume. Phase 4 focuses on increasing the load placed on the tissues of the body to develop maximal strength capabilities.

The third level of training, power, is designed to increase the rate of force production. To develop optimal levels of power, it has been shown that individuals must train with both heavy loads and light loads at high speeds. The power level consists of one phase of training: Phase 5 Power Training. This phase focuses on both high force and velocity to increase power.