---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 22
chapter_title: Introduction to Exercise Modalities
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Introduction to Proprioceptive Modalities
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
Unless there is an orthopedic limitation that using the stability ball would alleviate, it is recommended that novice exercisers with poor balance first attain proficiency at performing exercises on a stable surface and progress to a more unstable environment, such as a stability ball, particularly during Phase 1 of the OPT model.

As mentioned earlier, the unstable nature of the ball can create a falling hazard for individuals with poor balance. In addition, using a stability ball as a base of support is not recommended for individuals aiming to create maximal force during an exercise; thus, stability ball training is not recommended during maximal lifts using heavy loads (85–100% of 1RM) (Anderson & Behm, 2005).

## BOSU Balls

The BOSU ball is an inflated rubber hemisphere attached to a solid plastic surface. It looks like

a stability ball cut in half. The name BOSU is an acronym for “both sides utilized” referring to

the ability to use the device with either side up. When the flat side is down, the dome offers a

surface similar to a stability ball, providing a stability challenge, yet stable enough to stand on

(**Figure 22-2: 9**). When the dome is down, the hemisphere on the ground provides an unstable

surface with the flat bottom on top offering a platform on which the hands can be placed to

perform upper body exercises (**Figure 22-3: 0**).

### CRITICAL

Although both sides of a BOSU ball can be used, standing on the flat side (dome down), is not recommended by the manufacturer.

Training with the BOSU ball offers the ability to increase the intensity of an exercise by decreasing the stability. Unlike the stability ball, the dome side of the BOSU ball is relatively safe to stand on, so it is a practical device to train with to target lower limb balance and stability. Training while standing on an unstable surface has been found to increase neuromuscular activity when compared with standing on a stable surface, which can have implications for increasing balance, stability, and strength, particularly for injury prevention and during rehabilitation (Anderson & Behm, 2005; Behm & Colado, 2012; Fitzgerald et al., 2000; Myer et al., 2006).

## Images

**Figure 22-29: BOSU ball squats (round surface)**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH22_fig22.29_bosu-squat.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 22-30: BOSU ball push-up (flat surface)**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/CH22_fig22.30_bosu-push-up.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533