---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 6
lesson_title: Cancer and Pregnancy
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
There has been substantial research documenting the beneficial effects of exercise during pregnancy on the physiology and health of both the mother and developing fetus (Hinman et al., 2015; Szumilewicz et al., 2018). Fears that the fetus may be harmed by increased blood circulation, thermoregulatory changes, or decreased oxygen supply can be minimized with ap- propriate precautions (Hinman et al., 2015; Szumilewicz et al., 2018). The general consensus is that most recreational pursuits are appropriate for all pregnant women. Those already engaged in an exercise program before pregnancy may continue with moderate levels of exercise until the third trimester, when a logical reduction in activity is recommended (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2015).

The gradual growth of the fetus can alter the posture of pregnant women, making flexibility and core training important, particularly core exercises to improve strength of the pelvic floor musculature. As the mother-to-be progresses to the more advanced stages of pregnancy (second and third trimesters, or after 12 weeks), performing exercises in a prone (on stomach) or supine (on back) position, as well as uncontrolled twisting motions of the torso, is not advised. Moreover, certain resistance exercises, such as hip abduction, and hip adduction machines are not advised (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2015; Szumilewicz et al., 2018). Changes also occur in the cardiovascular system, decreasing work capacity and leading to necessary alterations in the cardiorespiratory program and the increased importance of proper hydration during aerobic activity. Lastly, fitness professionals should be aware that women in the childbearing period are vulnerable to nausea, dizziness, and fainting. Pregnant women should immediately stop exercising if they experience any of these symptoms along with any abdominal pain (or contractions), excessive shortness of breath, or bleeding or leakage of amniotic fluid (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2015; Szumilewicz et al., 2018).

During the postpartum period, there may be a tendency to rush an exercise program in an effort to return to prepregnancy fitness and body composition status. Fitness professionals must be careful to advise clients that the changes that occurred during pregnancy may persist for a month to a month and a half. Ideally, postnatal women should be encouraged to reeducate posture, joint alignment, stability, motor skills, and recruitment of the deep core stabilizers, such as the transverse abdominis, internal obliques, and pelvic floor musculature. A return to a more vigorous program should be deferred and entered into gradually.

# STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

A pregnancy can be divided into three segments, or trimesters:

	- First trimester: weeks 1 to 13

	- Second trimester: weeks 14 to 26

	- Third trimester: week 27 to end of pregnancy