---
section_number: 6
section_title: Program Design
chapter: 23
chapter_title: Chronic Health Conditions and Special Populations
lesson_number: 5
lesson_title: Osteoporosis and Arthritis
weight: 20%
objectives:
  - Designing exercise programs based on assessments and client needs.
---

## Content
# Osteoporosis

**Osteopenia **is a condition in which bone mineral density (BMD) is lower than normal and is considered a precursor to osteoporosis, whereas **osteoporosis **is a disease of bones in which BMD is reduced, bone microstructure is disrupted, and the actual proteins in bone are altered (**Figure 23: -7**). There are two types or classes of osteoporosis: type 1 (primary) and type 2 (secondary). Primary osteoporosis is associated with normal aging and is attributable to a lower production of estrogen and progesterone, both of which are involved with regulating the rate at which bone is lost. Secondary osteoporosis is caused by specific medical conditions or medications that can disrupt normal bone reformation, including alcohol abuse, smoking, specific dis- eases, or particular medications. Both types of osteoporosis are treatable and can occur in both men and women. Fitness professionals are encountering an increase in the number of clients with osteopenia and osteoporosis as they seek out help in trying to slow or reverse the effects of these conditions through exercise. Although the vast majority of clients will be women, men can have either of these diseases.

Type 1 osteoporosis is most prevalent in postmenopausal women because of a deficiency in estrogen, usually secondary to menopause. The disease is characterized by an increase in bone resorption (removal of old bone) with a decrease in bone remodeling (formation of new bone), which leads to a decrease in bone mineral density.

Osteoporosis commonly affects the neck of the femur (thigh bone) and the lumbar (low-back) vertebrae. These structures are considered part of the core and are located in the region of the body where the majority of all forces come together. Thus, a decrease in BMD places the core in a weakened state, making it more susceptible to injury, such as a fracture. Research has shown that the risk of hip fractures doubles every 5 years in postmenopausal women older than the age of 50 years (Sullivan et al., 2017; Svejme et al., 2012). Osteoporosis affects approximately 75 million people in the United States, Japan, and Europe (International Osteoporosis Foundation, 2019). Both diet and exercise are considered vital strategies for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis (Akkawi & Zmerly, 2018; International Osteoporosis Foundation, 2019).

There are a variety of risk factors that influence osteoporosis. One of the most important is peak bone mass. Peak bone mass is the highest amount of bone mass a person is able to achieve during their lifetime. Bone remodeling occurs as the result of stress placed on the musculoskeletal system.

## Key Terms

**Osteopenia**
Lower than normal bone density and a precursor to osteoporosis.

**Osteoporosis**
A condition of reduced bone mineral density, which increases risk of bone fracture.

## Images

**Figure 23-7: Osteoporosis**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH23_FIGF07.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533