---
section_number: 4
section_title: Assessment
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Health, Wellness, and Fitness Assessments
lesson_number: 3
lesson_title: Fitness Assessment Protocols: Heart Rate and Blood Pressure
weight: 16%
objectives:
  - Performing and interpreting client fitness assessments.
---

## Content
## Blood Pressure 

**Blood pressure (BP)** is defined as the outward pressure exerted by blood on the arterial walls (Kenney et al., 2015) (**Figure 11: -6**). Blood pressure is not consistent within each heart beat—the pressure fluctuates between a peak and a low pressure in the bloodstream during each beat. This explains why two numbers are measured. Both are important to score because collectively, they provide insight into the average pressure within the bloodstream.

**Systolic blood pressure (SBP)**, sometimes referred to as the top number, reflects the greatest pressure during the cardiac cycle. The SBP equals the force of blood pushing against the arterial walls when the heart is contracting and is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).

**Diastolic blood pressure (DBP)**, sometimes referred to as the bottom number, reflects the lowest pressure during the cardiac cycle. The DBP equals the remaining force generated by the blood in the arteries while the heart is relaxed (not contracting) and is also measured in millimeters of mercury.

### STRETCH YOUR KNOWLEDGE

NASM recommends fitness professionals measure RHR at the radial pulse versus the carotid pulse (which is located at the neck just to the side of the larynx), because the vagus nerve lies adjacent to the carotid artery. Applying too much pressure to the vagus nerve can inadvertently slow a client’s heart rate response.

## Key Terms

**Blood pressure (BP)**
The outward pressure exerted by the blood on the vessel walls; reported as systolic/diastolic.

**Systolic blood pressure (SBP)**
The pressure in arteries and other blood vessels when the heart is contracting; the first (top) number recorded.

**Diastolic blood pressure (DBP)**
The pressure in arteries and other blood vessels when heart is at rest or between beats; the second (bottom) number recorded.

## Images

**Figure 11-6: Blood pressure**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH11_FIGF06.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533

**Figure 11-6: ). Blood pressure is not consistent within each heart beat—the pressure fluctuates between a peak and a low pressure in the bloodstream during each beat. This explains why two numbers are measured. Both are important to score because collectively, they provide insight into the average pressure within the bloodstream.**
No alt text
URL: https://cdn-assets.nasm.org/pages/prd/1e006a4a-0d5f-4261-2db3-08db5236d565/9781284200881_CH11_UNNUN04.jpg?cb=2025-04-18T19:15:24.5684533